A MOVE to stop Mr. Gaitskell from
nominating any more Labour life Peers
M Ps tomorrow . Mr. Michael Foot has
put down a resolution on the subject
and he is to be backed by Mr. Will
A MOVE to stop Mr. Gaitskell from nominating
any more Labour life Peers is to be made at a
meeting of Labour 0M Ps tomorrow . Mr. Michael
Foot has put down a resolution on the subject
and he is to be backed by Mr. Will Griffiths ,
0M P for Manchester Exchange .
Though they may gather some Left-wing support , a
large majority of Labour M Ps are likely to
turn down the Foot-Griffiths resolution . Mr.
Foot's line will be that as Labour M Ps
opposed the Government Bill which brought
life peers into existence , they should not
now put forward nominees . He believes
that the House of Lords should be abolished
and that Labour should not take any steps
institution .
Though they may gather some Left-wing
support , a large majority of Labour
M Ps are likely to turn down the Foot-
Griffiths resolution . Mr. Foot's line will
be that as Labour M Ps opposed the
forward nominees . He believes that the
House of Lords should be abolished and
that Labour should not take any steps
Though they may gather some Left-wing support , a
large majority of Labour 0M Ps are likely to turn
down the Foot-Griffiths resolution . Mr. Foot's line
will be that as Labour 0M Ps opposed the Govern-
ment Bill which brought life peers into existence , they
should not now put forward nominees . He believes
that the House of Lords should be abolished and
that Labour should not take any steps which would
appear to " prop up " an out-dated institution .
Since 1958 , 13 Labour life Peers and
Peeresses have been created . Most Labour
sentiment would # still favour the abolition
of the House of Lords , but while it remains
Labour has to have an adequate number of
members . THE two rival African Nationalist
Parties of Northern Rhodesia have agreed to
get together to face the challenge from Sir
Roy Welensky , the Federal Premier .
Since 1958 , 13 Labour life Peers and
sentiment would still favour the abolition
Labour has to have an adequate number
of members . THE two rival African
Nationalist Parties of Northern Rhodesia
have agreed to get together to face
the challenge from Sir Roy Welensky ,
the Federal Premier .
Since 1958 , 13 Labour life Peers and #
Peeresses have been created . Most Labour sentiment
would still favour the abolition of the House
of Lords , but while it remains Labour has to
have an adequate number of members . THE
two rival African Nationalist Parties of Northern
Rhodesia have agreed to get together to face the
Delegates from Mr. Kenneth Kaunda's United National Independence
Party ( 280,000 members ) and Mr. Harry Nkumbula's African
National Congress ( 400,000 ) will meet in London today
to discuss a common course of action . Sir Roy is
violently opposed to Africans getting an elected majority
in Northern Rhodesia , but the Colonial Secretary ,
Mr. Iain Macleod , is insisting on a policy of change .
Delegates from Mr. Kenneth Kaunda's
United National Independence Party
course of action . Sir Roy is violently
majority in Northern Rhodesia , but the
Colonial Secretary , Mr. Iain Macleod ,
is insisting on a policy of change .
Delegates from Mr. Kenneth Kaunda's United
National Independence Party ( 280,000 members )
and Mr. Harry Nkumbula's African National
Congress ( 400,000 ) will meet in London today
to discuss a common course of action .
Sir Roy is violently opposed to Africans
the London talks on the Protectorate's
future . Said Mr. Nkumbula last night :
" We want to discuss what to do if the
British Government gives in to Sir Roy and
the talks fall through . There are bound
to be demonstrations . " Yesterday Sir Roy's
his chief a report on his talks with
Mr. Macmillan at Chequers .
Sir Roy's United Federal Party is
boycotting the London talks on the
last night : " We want to discuss what to
do if the British demonstrations . "
Yesterday Sir Roy's chief aide , Mr.
Julius Greenfield , telephoned his chief
a report on his talks with Mr. Macmillan
at Chequers .
the London talks on the Protectorate's
future . Said Mr. Nkumbula last night :
" We want to discuss what to do if the
and the talks fall through . There are bound
chief aide , Mr. Julius Greenfield , telephoned
his chief a report on his talks with Mr.
Macmillan at Chequers .
Mr. Macleod went on with the conference at
Lancaster House despite the crisis which had
blown up . He has now revealed his full plans
to the Africans and Liberals attending . These
plans do not give the Africans the overall
majority they are seeking . African delegates
are studying them today . The conference
will meet to discuss the function of a
proposed House of Chiefs .
Mr. Macleod went on with the conference
at Lancaster House despite the crisis
which had blown up . He has now revealed
attending . These plans do not give the
Africans the overall majority they are
seeking . African delegates are studying
them today . The conference will meet
to discuss the function of a proposed
House of Chiefs .
Mr. Macleod went on with the conference at
Lancaster House despite the crisis which had
blown up . He has now revealed his full plans
to the Africans and Liberals attending . These
plans do not give the Africans the overall majo-
rity they are seeking . African delegates are
studying them today . The conference will meet
to discuss the function of a proposed House
of Chiefs .
MR. IAIN MACLEOD , the Colonial Secretary , denied
in the Commons last night that there have been
secret negotiations on Northern Rhodesia's future .
The Northern Rhodesia conference in London has
been boycotted by the two main settlers' parties -
the United Federal Party and the Dominion Party .
But representatives of Sir Roy Welensky , Prime
Minister of the Central African Federation , went
to Chequers at the week-end for talks with
Mr. Macmillan .
denied in the Commons last night that
there have been secret negotiations on
Northern Rhodesia's future . The Northern
Rhodesia conference in London has been
Party . But representatives of Sir Roy
Welensky , Prime Minister of the Central
African Federation , went to Chequers at
in the Commons last night that there have
future . The Northern Rhodesia conference in
settlers' parties - the United Federal Party
Northern Rhodesia is a member of the Federation .
Mr. Macleod was not at the week-end meeting . But he told
M Ps yesterday : " I have no knowledge of secret negotiations . "
He said Britain had an obligation to consult the Federal
Government . But the final decision remained with the British
Government . Mr. James Callaghan , Labour's Colonial spokesman ,
said Sir Roy had no right to delay progress in the talks by
refusing to sit round the conference table .
Mr. Macleod was not at the week-end
meeting . But he told M Ps yesterday : " I
have no knowledge of secret negotiations . "
the Federal Government . But the final
Mr. James Callaghan , Labour's Colonial
delay progress in the talks by refusing
to sit round the conference table .
Northern Rhodesia is a member of the Fede-
ration . Mr. Macleod was not at the week-end
meeting . But he told M Ps yesterday : " I
have no knowledge of secret negotiations . " He
said Britain had an obligation to consult
the Federal Government . Mr. James Callaghan ,
Labour's Colonial spokesman , said Sir Roy had
no right to delay progress in the talks by
refusing to sit round the conference table .
Mr. Macleod thought the two Rhodesian
parties had refused to attend the talks
because Sir Roy had found messages
Mr. Julius Greenfield . He was at Che-
quers last week-end . They said they
and unconstitutional " interference by
Sir Roy's Federal Government in the
talks .
had refused to attend the talks because Sir Roy
had found messages sent from the Government were
" unsatisfactory . " African delegates to the talks yesterday
called on Mr. Macmillan to cease his negotiations with
Sir Roy's representative , Mr. Julius Greenfield . He was
at Chequers last week-end . They said they regarded
interference by Sir Roy's Federal Government in the talks .
Informal talks at Lancaster House will
resume today . President Kennedy today
defended the appointment of a Negro as
strong opposition from the anti-Negro
B.Kaufmann
Informal talks at Lancaster House will
resume today . PRESIDENT KENNEDY today
defended the appointment of a Negro as
his Housing Minister . It has aroused strong
Deep South . The negro is Mr. Robert #
in Government and State housing
projects .
Informal talks at Lancaster House will resume
It has aroused strong opposition from the anti-Negro
senators of the Deep South . The negro is Mr.
Robert Weaver of New York . One of his tasks
will be to see there is no racial discrimination
in Government and State housing projects .
off the opposition by telling a television
of Virginia - met today in closed session
to discuss Weaver's appointment . Senator
Robertson later disclosed he had sent a letter
complaints about Weaver's loyalty .
Senator Allen Ellender , of Louisiana ,
sparked off the opposition by telling a
television audience it was " current
Washington gossip " that Weaver once had
Communist affiliations . The Senate Banking
Committee , which is headed by another
Southern Senator - Willis Robertson , of
Virginia - met today in closed session to
discuss Weaver's appointment . Senator
to Mr. Kennedy saying he had received
Senator Allen Ellender , of Louisiana ,
sparked off the opposition by telling a
Willis Robertson , of Virginia - met today in
closed session to discuss Weaver's appointment .
Senator Robertson later disclosed he had sent a
complaints about Weaver's loyalty .
He said these concerned Mr. Weaver's
listed by the Government . Immediately
Mr. Kennedy rushed a letter to Senator
vestigation had reported on Mr. Weaver .
nomination before it can be con-
He said these concerned Mr. Weaver's
listed by the Government . Immediately Mr.
reported on Mr. Weaver . He believed
he would perform " outstanding service "
in his post . Senator Robertson's committee
has to pass Mr. Weaver's nomination before it
can be considered by the full Senate .
He said these concerned Mr. Weaver's alleged
association with organisations black-listed by the
Government . Immediately Mr. Kennedy rushed a letter
to Senator Robertson saying the Federal Bureau
of Investigation had reported on Mr. Weaver .
He believed he would perform " outstanding
service " in his post . Senator Robertson's
committee has to pass Mr. Weaver's
nomination before it can be considered by the
full Senate .
PRESIDENT KENNEDY is ready to get tough
Adenauer , the West German Chancellor .
PRESIDENT KENNEDY is ready to get tough
over West Germany's cash offer to help
America's balance of payments position . He
said bluntly in Washington yesterday that
And he indicated that his Government
would try to get Germany to pay more . He
did not mention personal talks with Dr.
Adenauer , the West German Chancellor .
tough over West Germany's cash offer to
help America's balance of payments position
He said bluntly in Washington yesterday
enough . And he indicated that his
pay more . He did not mention personal
talks with Dr. Adenauer , the West
German Chancellor .
But he said discussions " on a higher
discuss the problem with Dr. Brentano ,
anyway .
But he said discussions " on a higher
level than in the past " might be useful .
The President will probably discuss the
is the early payment of a 210million
debt to America . United States officials
quickly point out that this is money due
to America anyway .
The President will probably discuss the
And they are unimpressed by the Germans' claim
that they cannot pay more than 357million
without upsetting their own economy . The
Americans say Germany is having it too
good and is not paying for the past
Government to get them to pay a regular
sum towards the cost of keeping American
troops in Germany .
These support costs are a big drain on
America's dollar reserves . Dr. Adenauer's
answer is the once-and-for-all cash
offer of 357million . President Kennedy's
rejection of it is a painful blow to the
West German Government . It will now have
to pay more - and increase taxation to do
the new American administration .
These support costs are a big drain on America's
dollar reserves . Dr. Adenauer's answer is the
once-and-for-all cash offer of 357million . President
Kennedy's rejection of it is a painful blow to the
West German Government . It will now have to pay
more - and increase taxation to do so - or
run the obvious risks in upsetting the new
American administration .
spot . Joyce Egginton cables : President
Kennedy at his Washington Press con-
ference admitted he did not know
Russia in missile power . He said he
aides to come up with the answer on
February 20 .
And , since this is election year in West
Germany , Dr. Adenauer is in a tough spot .
Joyce Egginton cables : President Kennedy
at his Washington Press conference admitted
he did not know whether America was
lagging behind Russia in missile power .
He said he was waiting for his senior
military aides to come up with the answer
on February 20 .
This surprising statement was a sharp about-
face from his warnings during the
Presidential election campaign . He claimed
slackness in the Eisenhower Administration
had caused America to lag behind Russia
in nuclear development . President Kennedy
did his best to avoid giving Pressmen
a direct answer . George Brown
CHILDREN TWO men who are poles apart
in personality last night dominated
Mr. Brown , passionate and warm-hearted , led
Labour's attack on the higher health
charges . Mr. Powell , white-faced and outwardly
unemotional , replied with a statistical state-
ment - and ended by inciting Labour M Ps
to angry uproar . One dealt with the human
issue behind the Health Service ; the other
tried to show that the balance-sheet must
always come first .
Mr. Brown , passionate and warm-hearted ,
led Labour's attack on the higher health
charges . Mr. Powell , white-faced and
outwardly unemotional , replied with a
statistical statement - and ended by inciting
Labour M Ps to angry uproar . One dealt
with the human issue behind the Health
Service ; the other tried to show that the
balance-sheet must always come first .
doubt . For the Tories were massed
in answer to their whips to defeat a
" undermining the Health Service " and
able to bear them . Mr. Brown
declared that the policy under censure
was monstrous . It had offended many
supporters .
The result of the vote was not in doubt .
For the Tories were massed in answer to
their whips to defeat a censure motion
on the Government for " undermining the
on those least able to bear them . Mr.
Brown declared that the policy under
censure was monstrous . It had offended
many people far beyond the ranks of
Labour supporters .
The Press , many doctors and public were
denouncing the proposals . He quoted from
this letter which Mr. Gaitskell had received :
" My background is a doctor of 68 , who
has practised medicine for 43 years , chiefly
as a panel doctor . " I am a lifelong
Conservative . I am horrified and amazed
by my party's proposal to prostitute the
whole principle of the State service and
to render that service a hardship to poor
people .
the increased charges is a wicked ,
old - . " Mr. Brown went on : " We
are dealing with a noble edifice which
needs an imaginative architect to
improve it , but it has got a
quantity surveyor . We have descended
with bills of cost .
" After a lifetime of helping others and
healing the sick , my considered opinion is that
anybody supporting the increased charges is a
wicked , old - . " Mr. Brown went on : " We
are dealing with a noble edifice which
needs an imaginative architect to improve
it , but it has got a quantity surveyor . We
have descended from the real problems to
fiddling about with bills of cost .
We believe that a comprehensive medical service , free to the patient
at the point of need and with one standard for all sick
people , is good and attainable . " We remain for it . But the Tories
never were . " Interrupted by angry Tories , Mr. Brown retorted :
" The jackals bay when there is nothing better they can do . "
" We believe that a comprehensive medical
service , free to the patient at the point
of need and with one standard for all
sick people , is good and attainable .
" We remain for it . But the Tories
Mr. Brown retorted : " The jackals bay
when there is nothing better they can do . "
He told them that their conception of social services was wholly
different - fundamentally different from that of Labour . They
would provide an ambulance service for the absolutely
wretched - but it would not be too comfortable nor too easy to
get . Answering jeers that it was Labour which first put a
ceiling on health spending and started charges , Mr. Brown
reminded the hostile Government benches that was
done in 1950 because of the financial strain of
the Korean war .
He told them that their conception of social
services was wholly different - fundamentally
different from that of Labour . They would
nor too easy to get . Answering jeers that
it was Labour which first put a ceiling
on health spending and started charges , Mr.
strain of the Korean war .
In fact , the Tories made it worse now for the sick and
needy than Labour had to make it in 1950 . And
as a percentage of social service expenditure ,
health had fallen from 28.5 to 23.1 per cent.
Then Mr. Brown swung his attack directly to the
unsmiling Mr. Powell . He demanded that instead
of taking it out of the patients Mr. Powell should
take ruthless action against the drug making
industry , whose profits had risen by up to 400
per cent. in the last eight years .
In fact , the Tories made it worse now
for the sick and needy than Labour had
to make it in 1950 . And as a percentage
of social service expenditure , health had
fallen from 28.5 to 23.1 per cent. Then
Mr. Brown swung his attack directly to
that instead of taking it out of the
patients Mr. Powell should take ruthless
action against the drug making industry , #
whose profits had risen by up to 400 per
" Mr. Powell finds it easier to take it out of mothers ,
children and sick people than to take on this vast
industry , " Mr. Brown commented icily . " Let us have a
full inquiry into the cost of drugs and the pharmaceutical
industry . " The health of children today owed much
to the welfare food scheme . It was maintained
during the war . Now in conditions of Tory
affluence it seemed it could not be carried on .
" Mr. Powell finds it easier to take it out
of mothers , children and sick people than
to take on this vast industry , " Mr.
Brown commented icily . " Let us have a
full inquiry into the cost of drugs and
the pharmaceutical industry . " The health
food scheme . It was maintained during
the war . Now in conditions of Tory
affluence it seemed it could not be
carried on .
When Mr. Brown sat down Labour M Ps cheered for
a full minute - and even his bitterest opponents
on defence joined in . Mr. Powell devoted half his speech
to giving details of plans for improving the hospital service ,
on which indeed the Government is making progress .
His basic defence of the Health Service cuts was that
" even after the proposed changes the net cost of the
service to the Exchequer will have increased over
three years by 20 per cent.
When Mr. Brown sat down Labour M Ps
cheered for a full minute - and even his
bitterest opponents on defence joined in .
details of plans for improving the hospital
service , on which indeed the Government is
Health Service cuts was that " even after
the proposed changes the net cost of the
over three years by 20 per cent.
" That cannot continue without either
development being limited or an
adjustment being made in financing . "
The Government decided to adjust
the financing - which Mr. Powell
claimed was underpinning - not
undermining - the service . Answering the
attack on " economic charges " for welfare
foods , Mr. Powell said that all these
foods would still be free in families
receiving regular National Assistance
grants .
being limited or an adjustment being made
in financing . " The Government decided to
adjust the financing - which Mr. Powell
the service . Answering the attack on
" economic charges " for welfare foods , Mr.
Powell said that all these foods would
National Assistance grants .
" That cannot continue without either development
being limited or an adjustment being made
in financing . " The Government decided to adjust
the financing - which Mr. Powell claimed was
underpinning - not undermining - the service .
Answering the attack on " economic charges "
for welfare , Mr. Powell said that all these
regular National Assistance grants .
MR. Macmillan has picked a strong " brains trust "
team to negotiate terms for joining the Common Market .
And he has abandoned plans to visit President de
Gaulle this month to smooth the way . General
de Gaulle's official welcome last week
to Britain's moves towards the Six was
taken as a friendly gesture in Whitehall ,
but no more than that .
So the idea of personal mission by
the Prime Minister to Paris was dropped
Instead Mr. Macmillan will rely on a
hand-picked team under the leadership of
Sir Pierson Dixon , Britain's Ambassador to
France , to back Mr. Edward Heath , Lord
of negotiations with the Six . At the same
time the Prime Minister has offered
Commonwealth Governments every facility possible to
safeguard their interests
Seven Commonwealth countries have told Mr. Sandys ,
Commonwealth Relations Secretary , that they wish to be kept
in touch in London . Three of them - Canada , Australia ,
New Zealand - will have strong delegations at an opening
meeting in London on Monday . Once the Common
Market's Council of Ministers draws up the procedure
for negotiations in a fortnight's time , these Commonwealth
countries can arrange for observers to advise the British
negotiating team .
The team is composed of experienced
negotiators in several fields . Sir Pier-
son Dixon has a wide reputation as
a skilful backstage negotiator since
his days as Britain's chief UN dele-
gate . Second in command is Mr.
Eric Roll , 53-year-old Deputy Secre-
tary at the Ministry of Agriculture ,
Food , and Fisheries . The Foreign Office
Other leading members are : Sir Henry Lintott from
the Commonwealth Relations Office , Sir William
Corell-Barnes ( Colonial Office ) , Mr. G. R. Bell
( Treasury ) , and Mr. G. H. Andrew ( Board of Trade ) .
They will accompany Mr. Heath next month when
he goes to Brussels , headquarters of the Common
Market Commission , or wherever the Six decide
negotiations should be held .
Some of the problems were reviewed yesterday at a
meeting in Paris between M. Couve de Murville , French
Foreign Minister , and Mr. Heath . MR. Selwyn Lloyd -
a man with troubles enough back home - seems
fated to fly into trouble abroad . Last year it was
the riots in Istanbul , which enlivened the NATO
Council meeting .
Now we have the strikes and demonstrations in
Ghana coinciding with the meeting of the Com-
monwealth Economic Consultative Council - the
first to be held in Africa . Only a few hours af-
ter Mr Lloyd and his 24-strong delegation landed
at Accra this morning , hundreds of shop assistants
demonstrated outside the British-owned Kingsway
Stores , the largest in town .
The stores had been hit by the same strike wave
that has paralysed the port of Takoradi for the past
week . Root of the discontent : The austerity Budget ,
including a compulsory savings scheme which the
Ghana Government introduced in July . Ghana's strong
man is not here to face the storm . President Nkrumah ,
having made his contribution to the neutrals' conference
in Belgrade , has resumed his holiday on the Black
Sea and no one here professes to know when he
will return .
But in his absence his chief lieutenants have
not let him down . The strong arm of authority has
been raised against the strikers and is now beginning
to tell . Today's Ghanaian Times ( motto : " The welfare
of the people is the supreme law " ) reports : " The
Government has been urged to take immediate ac-
tion to deal ruthlessly with the strikers . "
The urge came from a conference of activists of
Nkrumah's Convention Party " after powerful addresses
by Comrades Krobo Edusei , Tawia Adamafio , " and
others . Strong deeds followed strong words . In Takoradi
a " limited state of emergency " was declared , giving
the Government adequate power to maintain all
essential services and ensure food supplies . Thus it
becomes an offence punishable with imprisonment
for anyone who " publishes a report likely to cause
alarm or prejudicial to public safety . "
And up to ten years' imprisonment can be imposed
on anyone convicted of sabotage . These stern measures
had the desired effect today at Kumasi where the
strikers gave in , but in Takoradi , the chief storm centre ,
they are still holding out despite the presence of 1,400
police and 16 armoured cars . And how did the
Government react when the strikers demonstrated in
Accra ?
At 9.40 Mr. Edusei , Minister of Transport and pro-
bably the toughest man in Mr. Nkrumah's team ,
drove up to the Kingsway Stores and faced the
demonstrators , most of them shopgirls in overalls .
" If you have not dispersed by ten o'clock , " he
told them , ' the police will act . ' At five to ten
a posse of police arrived and in less than
two minutes the crowd had gone .
If the threatened " counter-revolution " was not * to bring
the President back from his travels it might have been
thought that the muster from the 13 States of the
Commonwealth was an occasion worthy of his presence .
After all it was Mr. Nkrumah who suggested that this
year the Economic Consultative Council should meet
in Accra .
* enough
It has been left , however , to Mr. Goka , Ghana's Finance
Minister , to do the honours as host , in which capacity
he held a reception tonight in Accra's Ambassador
Hotel . POLICE , on direct orders from the Cabinet , are
openly intimidating members of Earl Russell's nuclear-
disarming Committee of 100 , the Committee claimed
yesterday . It said pressure was being put on
members and associates all over the country .
It alleged : Phones were being tapped and
going out of action ; Police were visiting
people " on no pretext whatsoever , except
to pass the time of day " ; Supporters had
been warned - one that his connection
that anti-apartheid agitation was
all right , but support for the committee
was not .
A third man's house was watched for four days
by plain-clothes men . Committee-member Mr. George
Clark commented at a Press conference : " The
most extraordinary things are happening . " Fifty
committee members will appear at Bow-street
today , including Lord Russell , Lady Russell ,
Lord Boyd-Orr , the Rev. Michael Scott , and
Mr. Clark .
They are required to show why they
should not be bound over for disturbing
the peace and for inciting a breach
of the peace . The summonses say they
conduct . " Lord Russell , 89 , was
putting his affairs in order , and
packing a case , at his Chelsea home
Mr. Ralph Schoenman , said :
" He is not going to agree to be bound over . That will
probably mean jail and , though frail , he is very fit and
will take the rigours of prison in his stride . He
hopes to be allowed to do some writing . " Back at
the Press conference , Mr. Clark said two committee
members tried a " plant " call on suspect phone . They
discussed a sit-down at Watford at 5.30 p.m. - none
was planned but police turned up .
Sir Roy Welensky said today that he no
longer accepted the good faith of Mr. Kenneth
Kaunda . Sir Roy , Federal Rhodesian Prime Minister ,
Party was a monster as vicious as the Zambia
until he was outlawed in 1959 . The record
of lawlessness among UNIP supporters went
back a long way , Sir Roy told the
Federal Parliament in Salisbury .
He cited cases in which hundreds of UNIP supporters
had been arrested or convicted since last year on
charges of creating disturbances . During the first
three weeks of the present trouble 287 incidents
had been reported in Northern Rhodesia . More
than 500 people - 167 of them members of
the UNIP - were convicted last month in the
Northern Province alone .
" Against this background must be taken Mr.
Kaunda's repeated statements that all he is
doing is in the name of non-violence , " said
Sir Roy . " I am now compelled to say that
I don't accept his good faith . " He said
Mr. Kaunda must know that his statements
had stimulated violence , but he had done
nothing to stop it .
" It is true he made a point of again being absent
from Northern Rhodesia when his followers have
indulged in such violence . " But Sir Roy pointed out
that a few months ago Mr. Kaunda said that
if UNIP did not get its way what would happen
would make the Mau Mau in Kenya " seem like a
child's picnic . "
JOHN DICKIE writes : Mr. Macmillan gave top
priority to the clash over Northern Rhodesia on his
return from Scotland yesterday . He summoned Mr.
Iain Macleod , Colonial Secretary , and Mr. Duncan Sandys ,
Commonwealth Relations Secretary for an hour's talks
at Admiralty House . A statement is expected today
to hold the door open for modifications to the
new Constitution provided law and order is maintained
in Northern Rhodesia .
Its terms have set the Prime Minister an exacting
problem . Mr. Sandys has warned of the risk of a
strong reaction from Sir Roy Welensky to any
suggestion that there may be fresh concessions to the
African nationalists . Mr. Macleod has ample evidence
from talks with Sir John Moffat , Northern Rhodesian
Liberal leader , and Mr. Kaunda , that the bulk
of moderates and Africans will reject the
Constitution unless it is modified .
A ROYAL welcome for the Kabaka of
Buganda ( King Freddie ) from Princess
Elizabeth Bagaya of Toro , kneeling at the
foot of his airliner's steps at London Airport
yesterday . Forty other Africans greeted him ,
kneeling with heads bowed . The princess ,
aged 24 , is now studying history at Cambri-
dge , where she is a friend of Prince William
of Gloucester .
King Freddie and three other hereditary rulers of
native kingdoms in Uganda arrived for talks with
Colonial Secretary Mr. Iain Macleod , before the
Uganda Constitutional conference opens next Monday .
The question : Their status in an independent Uganda .
The thorniest problem for next week's conference is
to settle the relationships between them and the
rest of the country . A Government report has
recognised their rights and recommended a form of
federal association , but the four kings are not
Instead , the kings will remain in London
and wait to hear the conference's proposals .
Then their views will be transmitted back .
MR. BUTLER , the Home Secretary , has decided
to meet head-on the biggest challenge to
Government authority yet presented by the
" Ban-the-Bomb " demonstrators . Police leave
has been cancelled and secret plans prepared
to deal with the mass sit-down rally planned
for Sunday in Parliament-square by the
Committee of 100 , the anti-nuclear arms
group .
It was Mr. Butler who authorised action which
ended yesterday in 32 members of the
Committee of 100 being imprisoned for inciting
a breach of the peace . The committee's
president 89-year-old Earl Russell and
his 61-year-old wife were each jailed for
a week . Playwrights Arnold Wesker ( The Kitchen )
and Robert Bolt ( The Flowering Cherry ) were
jailed for a month .
The possibility that the Government might
invoke the Public Order Act , 1936 , and
declare the whole rally illegal - whether
the demonstrators sit down or not - was
being discussed in Whitehall last night .
It was last used a year ago , to deal
with the St. Pancras rent riots . Today
Mr. Butler will have talks with Police
Commissioner Sir Joseph Simpson to
draw up final plans for the " Battle
of Parliament Square . "
Measures agreed so far include : 1 . A mass
call-out of police , special constables
and reserves , with 750 policemen posted
from outlying districts to stations in
the area - West End Central , Bow-street ,
and Cannon-row .
Today , for example , the Foreign Minister of Indo-
Foreign Minister . In fact such Yugoslav activity has
been # particularly intensified in the past year
or so and though so far , apart from joint action
in the United Nations , these exchanges have not
been seen on any wider basis , President Tito
is known for some time to have favoured a
conference of neutralist leaders .
The wish was particularly apparent in comments
on the occasion of the conference in Casablanca and ,
in particular , in Yugoslav approval of the idea of an
inter-African consultative assembly which would
coordinate activity on the political and economic
sphere ; and it is not difficult to see that President
Tito would like some such idea extended also
to the whole uncommitted world
But he now feels , in view of a changed international
situation and especially in view of fresh problems facing
the new and independent countries of Africa , that the
time is ripe to have more frequent consultations between
the uncommitted countries and even to work out common
stands on various problems facing those nations . Two
subjects , the Congo and Algeria , are the main topics
of the talks in Belgrade - and on both the two
leaders have identical ideas .
Two emissaries from the Laotian Government
of Prince Boun Oum have arrived in
Phnom Penh , Cambodia , to invite Prince
ister , to return to Laos . No details of
Prince Souvanna Phouma has not yet replied to
the mission , but recent statements made by him
in Phnom Penh indicate that he still regards
himself as the only legal Prime Minister of
Laos . His policy of strict neutrality from 1951
to 1958 kept the kingdom in peace , though
at the cost of virtual partition of the country
into the pro-communist north and the
pro-western centre and south .
Prince Souvanna's former Minister of
claims to be his representative in
Khouang and emphasized that
in the same terms .
This emphasis on the legality of the former
Government suggests that all is not well
with the political and military leadership
of the pro-communists . Most of the
province of Xieng Khouang and the
tactically useful Plain of Jars , however ,
appear still to be firmly in their hands .
The Government has claimed the
recapture of Vang Vieng , the pro-
communists' former base 60 miles
north of Vientiane , but this claim
A correspondent who travelled yesterday to within
this village was still held by the pro-communists .
160 speeches in 80 constituencies in 10 days , the Liberal
when Mr. Lester Pearson was chosen as party
leader .
In some ways it will be a testing occasion
for him , although some think his position
unassailable simply because there is no one
else in sight to supplant him . So the con-
ference will concentrate on laying the
foundations on which to win the next
election . The rally comes at a time
when in spite of carefully worded state-
ments by the Prime Minister there is an
air of electoral expectancy .
Members of the Cabinet are basing their speeches on
a new Conservative booklet called The Record Speaks
which outlines in some detail the accomplishments
of the party since it came to office three and
a half years ago . Nevertheless there is little
illusion in the Conservative Party that their
stock at home has fallen in the face of
heavy unemployment and an uncertain economy .
Last year saw the defeat of two Conservative
provincial governments , Quebec and New Brunswick , and
in the four federal by-elections last October the party
fared badly . They are now faced with four other by-
elections , one at Esquimalt Saanich , British Columbia ,
one in Leeds , Ontario , and the other two in the
Maritimes - Restigouche Madawaska , New Brunswick ,
and Kings , Prince Edward Island .
All four were Conservative strongholds . Last September
a public poll showed that for the first time since
the Administration came to power in 1957 the
Liberals were ahead ( 43 per cent were in favour
of " The Grits " if a federal election had been
held last autumn , 38 per cent for the
Conservatives and 12 per cent for the C.C.F. ) .
However , a separate poll revealed that Mr.
Diefenbaker was still ahead in terms of
popularity as an individual leader ( for
Mr. Diefenbaker 36 per cent , for Mr.
Pearson 34 per cent ) . How far is Mr.
Lester Pearson acceptable to the people
observers at the national rally will be
seeking an answer .
It is difficult for many to see Mr. Pearson
in the role of a popular orator at the
hustings , the spellbinder that Mr. Diefen-
baker was in the last two campaigns . The
impression remains that the Liberal leader
is still the diplomatist , more at home
in the chancery , or the corridors of the United
Nations , not the father figure , so necessary
in Canadian leadership , or the practical
politician , able to talk about sewage problems
in Algoma East .
On the other hand , Mr. Pearson excels
in meeting people informally , but many
still regard him " as some sort of cross
between an egghead and a missionary " .
His party advisers are now trying to
correct that image . The bow tie has
gone ; he is having lessons on
television techniques and is being coached
by speech experts .
Everything is being done to promote
a new image . Certainly , he is now a
much lessly trounced by Mr. Diefen-
baker in the House in those early
days . It has been a hard road back
but now , with plenty of political
ammunition given him by the Gov-
ernment in recent sessions , he is
leading the Opposition with skill and
assurance and is a match for the
Prime Minister across the floor .
Sentence Database
Mr. Pearson is now talking about " his
new and dynamic liberalism " and this
week will # show perhaps how far " Mike
will go . The main topic under review is
unemployment , but there will be 21
committees examining subjects
ranging from foreign investment in
Canada to the problems of the Atlantic
provinces . However , be this election
Sentence Database
Mr. Thorneycroft , the Minister of Aviation , who arrives in
Bonn tomorrow for talks with the Federal Government on a
European space satellite project , will find the Germans
interested in the principle of space research , but rather
sceptical about British plans for organizing it .
Stated more bluntly , they are still unconvinced that
this is not primarily an effort on Britain's part to
salve Blue Streak , which was abandoned last summer
as a military project ; or that the European space satellite
is indeed to be purely scientific in character .
Mr. Thorneycroft's main purpose will be to
remove these doubts , and to persuade the
Federal Government that the financial burden
involved is really worth while , at a time when
any increase in budgetary commitments
would almost certainly involve a corresponding
rise in taxation - something no one is prepared
to contemplate in an election year .
But , at the same time , there is reason to
believe that the Federal Government is not
convinced , on the basis of the information
it has so far , that such a project would
be justified from a scientific point of view ;
and not merely constitute a " prestige "
satellite , duplicating to some extent American
efforts , as Die Welt suggests today in
a highly critical editorial article .
On the specific question of the use of Blue
Streak , Mr. Thorneycroft's task will be
easier . He can point out that this is the
only rocket and launcher in Europe to
have reached a sufficient stage of development
for adaptation as the first stage in
putting a heavy satellite into outer space .
There has also been some talk of adopting another
British rocket , Black Knight , for the second
stage , but the French have one of their
own called Veronique which they would
like to see used .
The Foreign Ministry spokesman added
today , however , that the Brussels Treaty
was irrelevant , because research on the
various rocket stages had already been
concluded , and only cooperation on the type
of capsule was involved . A lesser obstacle
to German participation is the absence of
any Ministry or Minister directly responsible
for it - and therefore of any budget
under which funds could be appropriated .
This is expected eventually to replace the
Fiat G-91 , and the F 104 Starfighter ,
the backbone of the German Air
Force .
PRESIDENT KENNEDY renewed his pressure
on Mr. Harold Macmillan to join the
Common Market during their talks at Admiralty
House , Whitehall , yesterday . Much of their
to have been devoted to this main point
of American policy .
President Kennedy's report to the British
Prime Minister of the outcome of his recent
visit to Paris . There General de Gaulle had made
clear that he would accept Britain into the
laid down to meet the Commonwealth
and other reservations .
Mr. Kennedy told Mr. Macmillan that he still
Lord Home , Foreign Secretary , and Mr. McGeorge
Bundy , the President's special assistant for
security affairs , were brought in , the two
men talked alone .
An attempt to get more information about the
Admiralty House meeting will be made in the
Airport last night to arrive in Washington this
broadcast and television report on his
talks with Mr. Krushchov this evening .
The joint communique on Mr. Kennedy's and Mr. Macmillan's
third talks - the first were at Key West , Florida , the second in
Washington - said : " Their discussions covered the major problems ,
both economic and political , and revealed once again the
close agreement of the two Governments in pursuing their
common purposes . " Occasion was given to review the need for
economic co-operation and expansion in the general interests
of developed and underdeveloped countries alike . "
It said that the President and Premier noted " with satisfaction " the
agreement in Vienna on the need for an effective Laos ceasefire ,
which should lead to progress toward a Laos agreement at the
Geneva conference . " Particular attention was also given to the
nuclear tests conference and to the question of disarmament . " The
situation in regard to Germany was reviewed , and there was full
agreement on the necessity of maintaining the rights and
obligations of the allied Governments in Berlin . "
Apart from their formal Admiralty House talks , followed by lunch
given by Lady Dorothy Macmillan with Mrs. Kennedy and other
guests present , Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Macmillan met three more
times yesterday . In PARIS , Mr. Dean Rusk , U.S. Secretary of
State , gave a 90-minute briefing on the Vienna talks to the
15-nation Nato council . Some of his listeners said he was
" rather pessimistic " and talked of a Berlin crisis later this year .
From Nato headquarters Mr. Rusk went to see President de Gaulle
and informed him of the Vienna outcome . Last night Mr. Rusk arrived
in London in time to join the Buckingham Palace dinner and to
fly home with the President . In DUESSELDORF , Chancellor Adenauer
said the Vienna talks " might be the beginning of a slight improvement , "
but no big changes should be expected in the political situation .
RELAXED , smiling and clearly in the best of
spirits , Mr. Krushchov yesterday returned to
Moscow after his two days of talks with President
Kennedy , writes Dennis Ogden from Moscow . The
good beginning made at Vienna must be
followed up by new efforts for peace , the
Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda
declared yesterday . Events in Vienna " gave hope
to people of goodwill who hate the cold war ,
and to all who are striving for a stable peace , "
" Thinking over the results of the Vienna
meeting , peace-loving people will say ' a
good beginning . ' " Mr. Krushchov remained at the
airport to join President Brezhnev in welcoming
Dr. Sukarno , President and Prime Minister of
Indonesia , who arrived by Boeing 707 jet on a
state visit 40 minutes after Mr. Khrushchov had
arrived from Vienna . A cheering , delighted crowd
of Indonesian students broke through crash barriers
to surround their President on the tarmac for
In VIENNA , before flying off to Moscow ,
Mr. Khrushchov said he hoped his weekend
talks with President Kennedy would # help " to
establish an enduring peace between nations . "
Replying to a farewell speech from Austrian President
Schaerf , the Soviet Premier thanked Austria for
the hospitality and welcome he had received .
" The Soviet Union has always striven and is
striving to safeguard an enduring peace for
the peoples , to secure an early solution of the
MR. GAITSKELL today delivered a full-blooded
defence of the Polaris missile base . And by
implication he supported the establishment of
sites in Britain for the training of German
troops . His main theme was that nuclear
weapons were necessary to defend Britain , that
Britain must depend on Nato and " the West "
must have nuclear weapons so long as the
Soviet Union has them .
Addressing the annual congress of the National Union
of General and Municipal Workers , he said he felt
sure the Labour movement was coming round in
support of his views . Obviously conscious of the fierce and
widespread resentment over the U.S. Polaris base in
Britain , Mr. Gaitskell said that he even noticed that
supporters of unilateral nuclear disarmament were changing
their tactics by switching most of their emphasis on
to the missile .
Mr Gaitskell said that a member of an alliance could
not deny facilities to nations to which it was
allied . But governments should be free to negotiate
and refuse proposals with which they did not
he said , they were out of date and vulnerable and
would attract enemy action .
That argument did not apply to the Polaris submarine .
So long as the Soviet Union had nuclear weapons ,
the West , somewhere , must have them too . It
was far better for a weapon used for retaliatory
purposes to be under the sea rather than on land .
This was why the Labour Party did not think it right
to oppose the Polaris depot ship .
The party agreed that it was unwise to locate the base
in the Holy Loch , only 30 miles from Glasgow , a
city with two million people . It should be sited
in a more remote area . Mr. Gaitskell added that
the Scarborough conference decisions did not , in his
view , truly reflect the opinions of the majority
of party members and still less the party's
supporters in the country .
Mr Gaitskell added that agreement with the
unilateralists was not possible , though
he respected their views . He saw by reports
that " those who organise these things " were
recommending the supporters of unilateral nuclear
disarmament to shift the emphasis of
to the Polaris base .
To Mr. Macmillan , Mr Gaitskell said the
Prime Minister should begin to take
seriously the danger of the spread of nuclear
to Macmillan that he should press , I hope
disarmament . "
He thought , he said , that the Soviet
Union would be prepared to reach
an agreement on a zone of controlled
disarmament in Europe . Mr Gaitskell
concluded , declaring that the present
was the beginning of a great period of
opportunity for the party . It was a
great chance that should be grasped .
The General Council of the Trades Union
Congress should therefore consider the
matter . Consideration should also be given
to the regrouping of unions and the
modification of their structures to
meet the growing concentration of
capital . Mr. Cooper argued that a
common industrial contribution was
urgent - particularly in unions serving
workers in the same industry - along
Suggesting that a total T.U.C.
membership of eight million was a " poor
show " compared with some countries , he
argued that the position needed examination .
BEFORE President Kennedy met Mr.
Macmillan yesterday morning he was given
the views of a wide section of the
British people about Polaris submarine
bases in this country . An open letter
written by Earl Russell hoping that the
Earl Russell , President of the Committee
of 100 , told Kennedy that he should
take notice of " that very large and
growing section which is opposed to
the establishment of a Polaris base ,
whether at Holy Loch or elsewhere on
British territory . " He pointed out that
already there have been protests but
that " very much larger protests are to
be expected and are being planned . "
There are three kinds of reasons that justify
the protests and these should carry weight with
the U.S. Government , Earl Russell suggested . " The
first of these reasons is the importance of pre-
serving the hitherto cordial relations between the
U.S. and Great Britain , not only in Government
circles , but in public opinion . " Earl Russell
says it is inevitable , though profoundly
regrettable , that the agitation against
the Polaris base has generated some antagonism
to the policy of the United States .
The second reason is concerned with doubts
as to the safety of the people of Great Britain ;
" in the time of crisis it would probably be
impossible for the British authorities to
exercise any degree of control over the action
of Polaris submarines . " He argues that
there is a distinct possibility that so long
as there is a Polaris base in Britain the
Soviet Union might retaliate against
Britain alone .
" Such retaliation might , and probably would ,
destroy the whole population of Britain in
the course of , at the most , an hour " without
provoking American retaliation . Earl Russell
believes : " It is very questionable whether
British membership of Nato and British
permission of American bases on our territory
add anything to the strength of America ,
while , on the contrary , they impose upon
America an onerous obligation which it
may prove impossible to fulfil . "
The third reason is that the supreme
interest for the whole world - East and
West and uncommitted nations - is the
prevention of nuclear war . " A rapidly
growing body of opinion in this country
believes that Britain could be more effective
in preventing a nuclear war as a neutral
by helping to suggest agreements which could
be accepted by both East and West . "
THE next White Paper on defence , to
be published in March , is likely to
contain a five-year plan for the three
Services . Its aim will be to produce superbly
equipped , all-Regular forces of
about 400,000 men . The three Services
would be " integrated " to a greater
extent than ever before .
Short of wearing the same uniform , which is
not contemplated , the Navy , Army and Royal
Air Force would become , for practical purposes ,
a single defence force . There would be
complete co-operation at all levels in training
and operations . This would apply also in the
command structure and central administrative
with the Prime Minister's approval .
He has had numerous meetings with the Service
Ministers . He has also had talks with the Earl
of Home , Foreign Secretary , and with other
Ministers concerned with overseas aspects
of defence policy . Details of the scheme
are now being worked out by the Chiefs
of Staff , a process that may take four
or five months .
The scheme will be subject to Cabinet
approval . Mr. Watkinson remains con-
vinced that the policy initiated in
1957 , in Mr. Sandys's time as Minister
of Defence , is still correct . This was to
return to the tradition of all-Regular
voluntary forces , with the last National
Serviceman out of uniform by the end
of 1962 .
The Minister regards the recent trend
of recruiting figures as encouraging .
He is confident the aim can be achieved .
While the possibility of an eventual return
to National Service in some form
cannot be entirely discounted , he does
not agree that the point has been reached
where this need even be considered . If
National Service is ever resorted to ,
engagement would probably have to be for
three years .
It is thought this would be the minimum
necessary for the extended training modern
arms require and to enable each man to
serve at least a year overseas . There is
no truth in suggestions that Mr. Watkinson
is at odds with the Service chiefs over
the decision to dispense with National
Service , or over any other aspect of
defence policy .
Criticisms about Army manpower appear
to have come mainly from retired officers
who have held high positions but
are out of touch with the existing situation .
Mr. Watkinson has had the utmost support
from the C.I.G.S. , Field-Marshal Sir
Francis Festing , who believes completely
in the principle of an all-Regular army .
Gen. Sir Richard Hull , who is to succeed
Sir Francis , is equally convinced Mr.
Watkinson is right .
Sir Francis is to hand over to Sir Richard
as from Nov. 1 . The hand-over , due in
September , was delayed because of the
Berlin crisis . Mr. Watkinson and his advisers
felt the change would be unwise at a
moment # when attention had to be
concentrated on possible need for important
military operations . For this reason Sir
Francis stayed on , and # sacrificed
his leave .
There was a computed 8.4 per cent. swing
towards the Nationalist party of Dr. Verwoerd ,
the Prime Minister . This implies the dis-
appearance of the Progressive party from
the House . Early results in yesterday's
general election showed Nationalists being
returned in their strongholds , like Bloem-
fontein and the Transvaal , with slightly
increased majorities . In the Cape , the
veteran United Party politician , Mr. Harry
Lawrence , standing as a Progressive , was
The defeat of the leader of the
Progressive party , Dr. Steytler , in Port
Elizabeth South , announced immediately
afterwards by the United party candidate ,
Mr. Plewman , left the Progressives deprived
the Leader of the Opposition , Sir de
The contests were for 86 seats as 70
Nationalists and 20 United party candi-
dates are unopposed .
Long before polling closed at 8 p.m. it was
evident that voters were bored by the
Government's frequent appeals to the electorate .
The election was the fourth in four years .
In most constituencies it may go down as
the most apathetic in the country's history .
THE Prime Minister disclosed in the Commons
last night that he had considered early
in the Parliamentary recess whether to
mobilise reserves necessary to bring the
British Army of the Rhine on to a war footing .
He decided that it would be a great error
to do so and to recall Parliament . But
there would be no hesitation in mobilising
if a further deterioration in the situation
warranted such a step . It would have to be
accompanied by other measures of a military ,
economic and political kind . Mr. Macmillan ,
who was winding up the foreign affairs
debate , said the Government could not
be party to accepting as a matter of
principle the imposed division of Germany .
" We must not be rattled into surrender ,
but we must not - and I am not - be
afraid of negotiation . " Mr. Godber ,
Minister of State , Foreign Office , said
earlier that the Government had asked
the Medical Research Council to reassess
the fall-out position in view of the Russian
tests . The Council's findings would be
made public .
With a vigour and authority which delighted
old Parliamentary friends and foes alike ,
the Earl of Avon , the former Sir Anthony
Eden , in his maiden speech in the House
that # appeasement over Berlin could
only lead to war . To stand firm , he
declared , was not to invite war , but
the surest way to avert it .
It was the end of a rather curious
speech in which Mr. Macmillan wound up
the two-day debate on foreign affairs .
He began in a low , almost chatty mono-
tone , and his voice never rose to any
accent of urgency . He passed in rapid
review the United Nations Secretariat ;
nuclear tests ; the canard about British
interference with the United Nations
in the Congo ; Kuwait ; and South-East
Asia .
He spent most of his short half-hour on
Berlin . He deplored the possibility of
some " new myth " about betrayal of Germany
by the Allies . " We do not , " he said , " really
know what the Russians want . " But he was
certain that they wanted to establish a
final and irrevocable division of Germany .
Britain could not be a party to an imposed
division . But negotiation , as the debate had
shown , could be undertaken on a variety
of bases .
Mr. Macmillan explained that he had deliber-
ately refrained during the summer from
recalling Parliament or ordering mobilisation
by proclamation , such as would be
necessary to bring the British Army of the Rhine
on to a fully active footing . That
would have created a thoroughly unde-
sirable atmosphere of panic . He thought
that the situation was rather more
hopeful .
The Russians now realised its seriousness . The
French doubts were more about procedure
than about substance . The Prime Minister's
attitude of studied calm brought down the
temperature of the debate , which never
at any time rose to fever pitch , to a
remarkable degree of sub-normality .
Throughout Mr. Macmillan's speech the Earl
of Home , Foreign Secretary , was listening
in the Peers' Gallery .
The early speakers in the debate each
severely rated the speech of his predecessor .
These strictures were all too well justified .
We started with the plaintive wailings
of Mr. Healey , " Shadow " Foreign Secretary ,
described by Mr. Godber , Minister of
State , Foreign Office , as " pedantic and
obscure on Berlin , damaging and obscure
on the Congo . " In turn , Mr. Godber was
censured by Mr. Shinwell , former Labour
Defence Minister , for having read the
The trouble about such debates is that
they range too widely . They remind one of
in which all the boys were welcome to
take part , and only those who " really meant
business " removed their jackets . Not many
metaphorical braces were visible in the
early stages of to-night's debate . Mr.
golf-course Press conference , which he
described as " a display of flabby and
A reference to the reunification of Germany
brought a bark of " Start another war ! "
Then Mr. Healey launched out on his pet
theme of limitation of armaments in Europe .
This could , he suggested , be linked with
prohibition of the production of atomic
weapons in any part of Europe . Inspection
and control would be much easier to
establish in these territories .
Mr. Healey denounced the Government for
using double standards . Ministers had
rebuked the unaligned nations for not
condemning the new Russian tests , but
they themselves had no condemnation for
events in Angola or Algeria . It was not for
the Government , said Mr. Healey , to
take up moral attitudes , " especially when
the temple of their religion is the
bingo-parlour . "
This puzzled such students of comparative
religion as had failed to detect this cult .
But Mr. Healey had a partial and
limited success . He rallied behind him
the Left-wing opinion so coolly snubbed last
night by his leader , Mr. Gaitskell . Mr.
Godber's performance merited all the mild
scorn heaped on it by Mr. Shinwell .
True , he did tell the House that the
Government had asked the Medical Research
Council to reassess the fall-out position in
view of the Russian tests , and said that
the council's findings would be published .
He was not so happy in his defence of
the Government's failure to condemn
France for her nuclear tests in the
Sahara on the grounds that they were
only little ones .
This was too reminiscent of the nursemaid
and her illegitimate baby . For the most
part , Mr. Godber muttered his way
through a cliche-ridden Foreign Office
brief . He resembles the elephant seal , an
# otherwise endearing creature whose
articulation is limited , we are told , to a
series of heavy sighs . Sir Lynn Ungoed-
It was signed by 60 Labour M.P.s , many
of them Left-wing # sympathisers .
It condemned " the pollution of the world's
atmosphere as a crime against humanity . "
A personal letter of protest against the
tests from Canon Collins , chairman
of the Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament , addressed to Mr.
# Khruschev , was also taken to the
Russian Embassy .
A POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT writes : Ban-the-
bomb demonstrators thronged the Central
Lobby of the House of Commons last
night and formed a queue stretching
for more than 200 yards outside
in Old Palace Yard . About 2,000
lobbied M.P.s and harangued them
on disarmament .
MR SELWYN LLOYD may speed up his plans
to catch speculators in shares and property .
public opinion over his " July Budget " came
dramatically in the Commons yesterday . Mr
Lloyd said on # Tuesday that he proposed
to deal in his next regular Budget with
some profits which now escape tax .
Sir Edward Boyle , Financial Secretary
to the Treasury , said yesterday that the
Government does not like retrospective legislation .
He went on to describe the kind of
people the Chancellor hopes to tax . These
are people buying and selling shares within
a short period , those " stagging " on a new issue
and property dealers who form a chain of
companies and put one property deal through
each .
Mr. Harold Wilson , Shadow Chancellor , jumped up to
offer the Government an easy passage for such
legislation . " Why don't you make proposals to legislate
in the autumn ? " Mr. Wilson asked . " We wouldn't call
it an Autumn Budget . You can call it a Taxation
Management Bill , if you like . " While Mr. Wilson
was speaking , the Prime Minister and Mr. Lloyd
had a whispered conversation .
They nodded at each other and Sir Edward
rose to say that the Chancellor would bear
Treasury experts are already working on
the scheme . Profits of genuine investors
in industry will not be affected , but only
quick in-and-out speculator deals .
FRANK FOULKES , Communist president
of the ETU , refused yesterday to
" commit suicide " at the TUC's
invitation .
He was announcing his executive's rejection of the ultimatum to the
ETU. In reply to the call for his resignation he said : " Our rules
say that if an official resigns he is not allowed to run again
for three years . " I have only 2 1/2 years to go before I retire ,
so this is an invitation from my good friends of the TUC that
I should commit hara-kiri .
The other TUC demands : Five leading
Communists must not hold office for five
years ; Sub-committees set up to strip
secretary John Byrne of his powers must
disband in ten days . These the ETU
and " unwarranted " interference . " But it
agreed to postpone operation of the sub-
committees .
The small rocket craft , for destroying big
ships , are controlled automatically , even
to the preparations for launching their
rockets . Applauding on the river banks at
Leningrad were thousands now told that in
heat , transport and medical treatment - all
for a working week of 34 to 36 hours .
" The whole naval might of the Soviet
Union can be seen here - a truly inspiring
and proud sight , " said Moscow radio's
commentator . The parade was reviewed by
Marshal Andrei Grechko , commanding the
forces of the Warsaw Pact countries -
the Communist " Nato . " He said rocket-
carrying atomic submarines now formed
the basis of the Soviet Navy . MR.
MACMILLAN'S announcement in the
Commons of his momentous
Mr. Anthony Fell ( Yarmouth ) called the decision " shocking "
and added : " It is the most disastrous thing any Prime
Minister has done for many , many generations . " He
concluded : " The best service the Prime Minister can do
would be to resign . " The outburst shocked MPs of
all parties . Even close friends were signalling Mr. Fell
to stop .
There were loud cries of " shame " from
all parts of the Conservative side . Mr.
Fell appeared to be in tears as he sat
down . A few minutes later , Mr. Fell got up
and left the chamber . He returned five
minutes later to stand just inside the
doorway looking more composed . In the
middle of the amazing scene , Mr. Macmillan
waved his hand at Mr. Fell .
This seemed to infuriate Mr. Fell even more . " I cannot be told
to sit down by the Prime Minister . " Protests had been expected
from Tory rebels . But Mr. Fell's attack was unprecedented . He
accused the Prime Minister of " political double talk . " " It had
the effect on one former supporter that he now thinks this Prime
Minister is a national disaster , " he said .
Most MPs agreed that Mr. Fell's attack had , if
anything , rallied support to the Prime Minister .
This apparently , was Mr. Macmillan's assessment .
He confined his reply to the observation
that Mr. Fell had probably " maximised his
support . " There were no other attacks
of such ferocity . But there was ample
evidence of Conservative and Labour
opposition , which will be aired in the
debate tomorrow and on Thursday .
As Mr. Macmillan made his announcement , the
House was crowded . He said : " No # British
Government could join the European Economic
Community without prior negotiation with a view
to meeting the needs of the Commonwealth countries ,
of our European Free Trade Association partners
and of British agriculture . " Near the end of a
long statement , Mr. Macmillan stated the
Government's intention :
" After long and earnest consideration , Her
conclusion that it would be right for
Britain to make a formal application . .
the Community . " At this point , Mr. Paul
Williams ( Cons. , Sunderland ) called out
" Shame . " Mr. Williams is a close
He claimed that , unless we were in the
Common Market , we should not be able to
play any part in # determining its future .
" We can lead better from within , " he said .
Mr. Macmillan dealt with the main objection
who created a scene on this point on
behind the Serjeant at Arms' chair .
Mr. Macmillan said we could be more help
to the Commonwealth through the
tribute to the development of the
Common Market . " The Community
( Common Market ) has imparted an
impetus and an economic growth
to The Six . Above all , it is an idea
he said .
Referring to previous negotiations , Mr. Macmillan looked towards
Mr. Reginald Maudling . " These were negotiations in which the
President of the Board of Trade played a conspicuous part , " the
Premier said . He dismissed the idea that Britain would be
swamped by cheap labour . Our industry , he said , would
probably gain . " Many people feel we have had , perhaps , too
much shelter , " he went on .
Conservatives protested when
Mr. Gaitskell said he had been
told this " by some # people
of considerable authority , " he
retorted . " I agree with the Prime
Minister that I do not think
we are necessarily bound for
federalism in Europe , " he went
on .
If we joined the Common Market , our
food subsidies would probably be
replaced by a system of tariffs " That
will mean a rise in the cost of living . "
BUDGETTE or no Budgette YOU are
spending more as the summer holiday
season moves into top gear .
On the eve of August Bank Holiday
the spending spree is at a new
all-time peak .
Note circulation soared for the
sixth successive week - this
time by more than 15,000,000 # last
week . And that brought the figure
to a record 2,415,000,000 . This was
100,000,000 more than the corresponding
week last year and 37,000,000 up on
the 1960 record set last Christmas .
Now look at the other side of all
these coins .
The big " squeeze " means that it is going to be more
difficult to arrange a loan or overdraft . And banks will be
stricter in recalling existing overdrafts . This is underlined in
the Central Bank's weekly return ... ... which shows that more
than 163,000,000 of the banks' money is now frozen in the
form of special deposits with the Bank of England .
Banks have paid in a first
instalment of almost 8,000,000
in response to the Budgette appeal .
About another 70,000,000 is due
by September 20 . For nearly a year
about 150,000,000 has been frozen .
MR. KRUSCHEV raises the bogy of
German militarism in his replies to
the West on Berlin . And he repeats
that the problem " must be solved
this year . "
The Notes to the Big Three and a memorandum to
West Germany were published in Moscow yesterday . They
tell : The U.S. - It is false to say the absence of a peace
treaty with Germany causes no real danger . West Germany ,
with its militarists and revenge-seekers , is becoming a
hotbed of war danger in Europe . Even now , aided by
the U.S. , Britain and France , it has more than enough
forces and arms to touch off a world war .
BRITAIN - One cannot but wonder at British bases being
put at the disposal of those very militarists who razed
Coventry and barbarously bombed London and other British
cities . FRANCE - One can hardly conceive the French are
not alarmed ... . Next door , in West Germany , before everyone's
eyes there has sprung up a regular army led by former Nazi
generals and officers .
With fire and sword France denies Algeria the right to self-
determination and tramples on Tunisians' right to independence .
WEST GERMANY - Russia would like to see a clear #
realization that West Germany would not survive even a few hours
of a third world war . The best way to rule out such a tragic
contingency would be to sign a peace treaty to remove the cancerous
growth of West Berlin's occupation status .
Behind Bonn's slogan of German self-
determination is the intention to impose
on East Germany the regime existing in
West Germany . REFUGEES are pouring out
# of East Germany into West
Berlin faster than ever . Mr. K's latest
speech scared 1,157 East Germans to
cross into West Berlin's reception centre
DURING MONDAY NIGHT . And officials
expect the total to leap to
3,000 a day .
This figure has been surpassed only on the eve of the
East German disturbances on July 17 , 1953 . And officials
fear it may be too much for the city's refugee camps .
They will overflow and private houses will have to be used .
Prime Minister after Prime Minister speaks out
in revulsion against the South African
Government's policy of apartheid as we wait
for the curtain to rise on the Commonwealth
Conference in London . Will it end with
South Africa's exclusion from the
Commonwealth ? The issue is touch and go .
There is a possibility that it will not be
settled at this conference . It may be agreed to
wait until South Africa actually becomes a
Republic later in the year . But if a final
decision is to be faced now , on which side
do the strongest arguments lie ? THE Archbishop
of Capetown has shown that the matter is
not clear-cut .
The Archbishop has long been a courageous
fighter against apartheid . He must be heard
with attention . On purely practical grounds he
holds that it would be a mistake to expel
South Africa , weakening the whites who are
working for a change of policy . In his view
it would also be against the interests of the
Africans .
He holds that more pressure can be put on South
Africa while she remains in the Commonwealth
than could be exercised were she cut off from it .
On the other hand , those who favour expulsion , inclu-
ding African leaders , feel that nothing less than the
shock of expulsion will weaken the grip of Dr.
that Dr. Verwoerd refuses to consider abandoning
the apartheid policy .
policy of racial discrimination in any of its countries
is surely the one thing that it could not survive .
Whatever statesmen say at the conference table in
London , millions at home would regard as fraudulent
a Commonwealth which had room for a racist
South Africa . And this is a Commonwealth in
which five citizens are coloured for every one
who is white .
Seen in this wider picture , a South Africa that clings to
apartheid is a menace to the Commonwealth and a
solution would be for the Commonwealth to draft
a set of principles excluding race discrimination .
or go out .
THE Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh come home
tonight from their tour in the East . The duke's
trigger-finger and the ritual slaughter of beasts
have taken the headlines in this country .
Nevertheless , the tour has been an immense
success . The Queen has won a triumph . It
would be pleasanter if such cruel and feudal
performances as tiger and rhino hunts were
dropped from future Royal programmes .
But the Queen and the Duke have pleased millions by
their visit . The warmth of their welcome in India and
Pakistan are happy memories . WEST GERMANY - followed
yesterday by the Dutch - has made the gesture
of a good neighbour . She has put up the value
of her money .
Certainly , the rise is very small . But it is a step
in the direction of live-and-let-live . Hopes
will now grow brighter of further international
co-operation , which is the only way to solve the
payments difficulties that upset the Western world .
Britain and the U.S. , which have problems with
their balances , will gain some immediate help .
What it means in practical terms is that our
exports to Germany will now be a little cheaper
for Germans to buy , while the goods which
Germany exports will be made a little dearer .
Booming Germany is deliberately encouraging more imports
as a means to curb rising prices at home . She is
also aware how # unpopular she has been growing
by failing until now to co-operate as a creditor nation
should . Germany exports much more than she imports .
For upwards of five years the world's reserves of
dollars have been drained into Germany .
There they have stayed uselessly locked up because
Germany has no tradition of trading abroad . In addition
the strength of Germany's trading position has attracted
speculators to hold marks rather than pounds or dollars ,
hoping for the mark to rise , as has now happened .
WILL the new valuation be enough to correct
Germany's massive trading surplus and choke
off speculation against dollar and pound ?
That is doubtful . If however , in addition to her new
good-neighbour gesture , Germany takes a really big
share in giving aid to underdeveloped nations , the
world outlook will be brighter . What gives rise
to optimism is the sign that Germany and the
other leading Western nations are at long last
moving towards a solution of currency problems
by co-operation .
A CURIOUS advertisement on page nine , paid
for by that curious body Moral Re-Armament .
Those who lend their names to this kind of
advertisement are worthy people , a little innocent
of politics , perhaps , or carried away by the
idea that moral regeneration would solve
all our problems . So it would . While we are
waiting for the millenium , however , most of us
would prefer to put our hopes for earthly justice in
instruments of democracy , such as trade unions
and our local and national Parliaments .
Should the Herald publish such advertisements ?
This is a difficult question . It would obviously
be wrong to refuse all political advertisements with
which we disagree . When an advertisement
contains statements whose factual truth is
doubtful , or where the total content would be
deeply repugnant to our readers , it is right to
exercise editorial discretion . The MRA
advertisement falls into neither category , though
many readers will dislike it .
The first reaction of the Sudanese
Government was to denounce the United
Nations for " negligence and impotence , " and
to say that its 400 troops in the Congo
would be taken home . The reaction can be
understood . The Sudan's concern for its
men is natural . But this could hardly be
a # dignified exit . IF the UN is
blamed for being weak , it would be
more logical to send in more men ,
not weaken it further by desertion .
It is unjust to pass the buck to Mr.
Hammarskjold and the UN's servants . The
responsibility rightly belongs to the nations
which have undertaken the task of pre-
serving peace in the Congo . That is not a
ceremonial duty , and the soldiers have every
right to blame the politicians unless they see
it through . When the United Nations instructed
Mr. Hammarskjold to use force if necessary to
prevent civil war , it was clear that new dangers
would arise unless it gave him the political ...
That was the first point that Mr. Hammarskjold
made . India has responded handsomely by providing
such incidents as that at Matadi would not
happen . THE UN's ability to keep peace depends
simply on adequate support by the nations
which have set their hands to this plough .
The big Powers involved in the Cold War
must of course keep out . The Americans were
justified in diverting naval ships in case
non-combatant help was wanted ; but they
in fighting . Yesterday the ships turned away
again , satisfied that they were not required .
It is to be hoped that the UN will be
re-established in their port by negotiation
But back , Mr. Hammarskjold is determined ,
they must go . The best news for the Congo
would be agreement between its rival
political leaders . Through the patient efforts
of UN conciliators they are meeting for
the first time , in Malagasy ( formerly
Madagascar ) . THE world will sigh with
relief when this strife-torn land gets
itself a government which all outsiders
can recognise .
ONLY a man wrapped in the impenetrable cocoon of what he regards
as a divine mission could have spoken of apartheid as " a
policy of good neighbourliness . " We may be sure that
he is not being hypocritical . That is what he
really believes . A good neighbour to those Africans
who , under apartheid , will be forced back to
their tribal reserves with no prospect but a
cramped and primitive existence .
A good neighbour to those Africans who will con-
tinue to live as hewers of wood and drawers of
water in the white areas of South Africa , without rights
and without hope . THE same sort of good neighbour
that he proved to be to the Jews fleeing from
Hitler in the thirties . It was Dr. Verwoerd who
led a protest against admitting any of them
because they would " defile " the national
white stock .
It is impossible to make contact with Dr. Ver-
woerd in his nightmare world . It is this that
makes illusory any hopes that he may be in-
fluenced to change course . The Archbishop of
Capetown , Dr. Joost de Blank , has pleaded that
South Africa should be allowed to stay in the
Commonwealth . Otherwise , he says , those inside the
country who still oppose apartheid will be
left even more isolated and alone .
The views of the Archbishop , who has
Christianity really means , must carry weight . But
what , in fact , can the other Commonwealth countries
do to bring support and comfort to this gallant
minority ? THERE is no evidence that the
policy of appeasement has modified the
actions of the Nationalists . On the contrary ,
apartheid is being applied ever more
ruthlessly .
The shock of expulsion from the
Commonwealth now seems to be the only
way left to try to bring home to the people of
South Africa that Dr. Verwoerd is leading them
to disaster . It may be that the Commonwealth
step . If that is their decision they should also
go unequivocally on record that they regard
apartheid as evil and indefensible .
Unless they do at least that , Dr. Verwoerd will
be able to return home claiming a triumph .
His smile will be blander than ever . WE are in
now and June , when the Duke of Kent will
marry Miss Worsley , hardly a day will pass
without a story or a picture or probably both ,
about the nuptial arrangements .
What seems certain is that those who
advocate putting off any approach until
Mr Krushchev gives evidence of a change
of heart ( whatever that may mean ) would
have us run risks greater than the West
ought to run - and greater than President
Kennedy's most influential advisers seem
disposed to face . The real question is
what we should put to the Soviet
Government as a basis for talks : and
On this reading what Mr. Gollancz calls
manoeuvring , and what we should call
cool-headed and inventive negotiation , is
a means not to destruction but to safety .
The Government's pompous little statement
on Northern Rhodesia does not say much ,
but it says what is necessary - that
the Northern Rhodesia Constitution is
open to revision . This is news , however
much the Government tries to disguise
it by saying that the revision would be
Formula One , which appeared in February , appeared to make
this likely ; Formula Two , which appeared in June , made it
very unlikely ; if Formula Three restores the original
principle , that is all that need be required of it . It is a pity
that the Government should ever have been led away
from this principle . It is a great pity that the
Government should give the appearance of responding , not
to Mr Kaunda's reasonable representations , but to
the violence which he tried to prevent .
To be able to say " New York next week " is an
important advance . We must not be overconfident
that this # meeting will lead on to further
and decisive ones ; but without it , we could not
look for them . Federal Germany votes tomorrow
and not a day too soon . There can seldom have
been an election campaign which more people
in and out of the country wanted to see over
and done with .
To Germany's Western allies the campaign has been a
millstone weighing down and almost paralysing their
efforts to work out sensible ways of dealing with
the Berlin crisis . It need not have been such a burden
if Western Governments had not been convinced
that they must do nothing to harm even remotely Dr
Adenauer's chances of being returned as Chancellor .
But they were so convinced and they
have had to take the consequences . Mean-
while in Germany itself the course of
the campaign has dismayed a good
many people : they too will be glad
when the polling stations close .
But discussion on current points of east-west con-
flict could not go much farther than , for example , the
truism that policies of menace and mutual disarmament
and it is an achievement - is to make religious con-
tact across the greatest political barrier in what
is not yet a unitary world .
The notification he envisages must be given at least two days before the
agreement is signed . To this there will be some opposition . The Bill is
short and modest in scope , and it is doubtful whether the other Private
Members' Bills in the offing will fill all the gaps . This fact may give
the Government an extra excuse for counselling patience until the
next report from the Molony committee .
Comprehensive legislation is obviously preferable . They should not ,
however , disdain this opportunity of obtaining a useful sample of
parliamentary opinion by at least allowing these Bills a fair run .
Centigrade v. Fahrenheit . The fight is on . The challenger has behind
it not only the authority of the SECRETARY of STATE for AIR
but also the backing of the DIRECTOR GENERAL of the Meteoro-
logical Office .
The press and the broadcasting authorities are
asked to help . To begin with , both tempe-
ratures will be put in the ring together .
SIR GRAHAM SUTTON , however , made no bones
about it yesterday . The purpose is to give
fahrenheit the knock out . The backers of
centigrade would have got off to a better
start if they had taken more pains to
explain the advantages to the general
public of the change .
It is true that SIR GRAHAM said there is
at the moment " an awful mess up " in
the measurement of temperatures . This ,
of specialists . The ordinary British man
Rather than fifty million people having
to be put out for the sake of 50,000 is there
should not change to fahrenheit ?
Can it be shown that the one scale is demon-
strably better than the other ? The centigraders may
circumstances the time would come when this would
In any case , fahrenheit need not lose heart .
authorities ganged up to alter the habits
of the people . That effort was to enforce
clock . Then , also , the B.B.C. were
roped in . The only result was
A BAFFLED and bewildered little country
stands at the centre of an international
storm . Belgium is accused - without a
scrap of evidence - of being implicated in
the murder of Patrice Lumumba . Her
leaders are insulted , her embassies are
attacked in a score of countries .
In Ghana , President Nkrumah , who
has done more than most to stir up
trouble in the Congo , orders every Belgian
citizen to quit his country . HOUNDING
Belgium has become an international
pastime . Why ? Because those who
said the Congolese could govern themselves
will not admit they were wrong . So
Belgium , bowed down by internal
troubles , mourning a terrible air crash ,
is made their scapegoat .
Who will speak for Belgium ? Who else but
Britain . We have fought beside Belgium
in two world wars . We are allies still .
Britain should champion Belgium . Not
with the careful , hooded language of diplomacy ,
but boldly and fearlessly . It is time to
show the world that this country does not
desert her friends . HAPPY , happy
families ! Never before have Britain's
larders been so well stocked .
Supplies of meat and dairy produce were
substantially higher last year than in 1959 .
Lucky , lucky housewives ! To have such a
splendid variety of goods to choose from .
Not so long ago older folk were reminding
young wives , # harassed by
shortages , of the good old days of
abundance . Now it is mother who
picks up recipes from # her daughter .
The dinner table is the best answer to the grumblers in
Britain today ! " THIS is colour day , " proclaimed the American
television network , N.B.C. And hour after hour it poured out its
programmes in bright colours . In America colour TV is five years
old . There are already 600,000 sets in use . What about Britain ?
The B.B.C. is ready to launch a colour TV service , but the
commercial TV contractors want to delay it for 10 years .
The Government should settle this argument with two words to
the B.B.C. : - Go ahead ! ONE man beyond all others is saddened
by the deaths of two elderly sisters who killed themselves because
they had to leave their cottage . Mr. John Crabb , clerk to
Newmarket urban council , says : " I shall always feel this as a
personal failure . "
There is no reason whatsoever why he should reproach himself . The
sisters had to quit as their home was falling down . And Mr. Crabb
did his best for them , even driving them to a new house . John
Crabb has the qualities of sympathy and understanding . Too
often lacking in officialdom . MR. HENRY NEWTON of Acton
does not want his daughter to marry a Scotsman .
He says that the Scots are foreigners who have no business to
be in England . The first ruler of the United Kingdom was a
Scot . The Lord Chancellor is a Scot . The Prime Minister is a
Scot - and so were four of his predecessors this # century .
Let Mr. Newton beware . By protesting against Scotland he
may be guilty of rebellion !
ARCHBISHOP MAKARIOS puts the Commonwealth on trial .
His ex-Eoka Government decides that Cyprus will join it for
five years . During this period Britain will be expected
to subsidise and defend the Cypriots . They will enjoy
all the trading benefits of Imperial Preference . It is a
safe bet that at the end of five years Makarios and
company will sign on again .
It is equally certain that the British Government
will welcome them . How splendid it would be if , just
for once , the Government were to voice the real feelings of
the British people . And tell Makarios they are not
prepared to accept him on such terms . GOOD cheer
for the week-end . Ford Motors are to put 13,000
men back on a five-day week .
One more demonstration of the industry's recovery . As
springtime approaches , orders pick up . And the car men get
ready for another bustling season . The pessimists
said the motor industry was on its knees . The optimists
said " Nonsense . " As usual , the optimists have been
proved right . EARL RUSSELL and his friends have
hit on an original way of spending this afternoon .
They intend to sit outside the Ministry of Defence . It is
their protest against the H-bomb . They ought to have a
pleasant time . The weather forecast is good ; except for them ,
Whitehall should be deserted . And they will have a fine view
of St. James's Park , with its placid lake , pelicans ,
rare ducks , and other wild life .
as a serf .
HOW the Government must repent its haste and folly
in Rhodesia ! Eighteen months ago this territory
was peaceful , orderly , and thriving . Africans within the
Federal Government were getting valuable experience in
Secretary . Suddenly everything changed . Timetables were
scrapped . The ill-conceived Monckton Commission was
rushed out to Rhodesia . Overnight , minor African
politicians were inflated into international figures .
And as the British Government stepped up the pace
of change , so the Africans stepped up their demands .
TODAY , in London , that rash and thoughtless policy has
caused a crisis - a crisis that never should have happened .
No wonder there is doubt and fearful heart-searching .
If the Government now reverses its plan to give the
Africans control in Northern Rhodesia it may indeed face
difficulties from African politicians greedy for power .
But if it fails to modify that plan Rhodesia may well
be plunged into chaos , like the Congo . For Mr.
Macmillan and his ministers there is no choice . They
must safeguard Rhodesia against chaos . And try to
repair the damage they have done . WHO can grow the
fastest ? That is the exciting competition going on
among Britain's major industries .
Top of the table , at the moment , is the chemical industry .
Then comes engineering , followed by iron and steel .
Even the staid and timid Treasury is cheered by the
tremendous upsurge in investment . It reports that new
factory building this year is likely to be 40 per cent
up on 1960 . Britain's business men are right to back
their faith with cash .
For expansion today means still greater
prosperity tomorrow . BERTRAND RUSSELL ,
the-Bomb crusade , has devoted following .
Thousands march with him - and sit with him
too . It is said by some that he is a saint ; by
others that he is a prophet . He is , in fact , a
who has been spectacularly wrong on the great
issues of our time .
BEFORE the war he urged the British people
to welcome Hitler's troops as tourists .
and his supporters have been able to pursue their
mile route in Surrey . A warden , Mr. Jack Finlay ,
has been appointed to smooth out difficulties for
householders when trenches are dug outside their
front gates . Splendid . By showing concern
Happy patrolling , Mr. Finlay !
GOOD for Sir Roy Welensky ! The tough ,
resolute Premier of the Rhodesian Federation
shakes the life out of his critics . He calls them
against African fanatics and woolly minded
individuals in the West . Some may ask : Is
Welensky justified in being so harsh to those who
disagree with him ? The facts answer that .
CONTRAST his firm , successful rule in Rhodesia
with what has happened in the Congo . There
Welensky's opponents have carried their theories
into practice . There a UNO army of Africans ,
bossed by an Indian , has been in charge for
months . And what has it made of the Congo ?
A bloodstained shambles . No wonder
Welensky has lost all patience with his
misguided tormentors .
They have earned his strictures . And his
contempt . SOME people are for ever complaining
that teenagers earn too much and spend it all
when they get it . Now a survey of the Post
Office Savings Bank shows how wrong that
idea is . The biggest group of depositors in
the bank is made of boys and girls aged 15
to 19 .
Certainly teenagers earn more than ever before .
Certainly they spend more . But how splendid
that in the most prosperous days in this
country's history the old-fashioned virtue of thrift
should still have a powerful appeal for young
people . THE Danes are annoyed with British
farmers for fighting against Danish competition .
They say that our farmers do not seem to
understand the meaning of free trade .
There is no doubt what the Danes understand
by free trade . It is that they should be free
more and more from our rivals . Germany has
now supplanted Britain as Denmark's
principal supplier . The farmers of Britain
understand free trade . That is why they fight
it .
THE Palace cinema at Buckley , near Chester , will be
reopened next week by Barry Flanagan and Eric
Platt , both aged 19 . Eric says : " We believe in the
cinema . And we know what people want . " The
combination of enthusiasm and shrewd anticipation
enterprises . Barry and Eric have enthusiasm . They
It could be curtain up on two success stories . Of
the old Palace . And Barry and Eric . DONS at
Cambridge want the study of agriculture to become
an honours degree course . Farming is Britain's
most vital industry . It is increasingly dependent
on new techniques - and on the universities to
provide men of knowledge and skill .
The older universities are often accused of being
interested only in dead subjects . Now Cambridge has
the opportunity to show is just as interested in the
living . Particularly as its rival , Oxford , has had a
JOHN GLENN , Virgil Grissom , Alan Shepard . One of
people believed that there were no more worlds to
conquer .
Nobody 's going to shove 2ole Uncle Sam around ! " He then
took out a piece of paper , wrote his address on it and added :
" Anybody mucking the Yanks about had better call on me
first . I won't stand for it . " Exit a puzzled American .
The other incident occurred in the boat-train from Cherbourg
to Paris .
The travellers from the New World who had
been in Britain many times before , were
slightly stunned . Afterwards they said : " We thought
we knew it all , but you Britishers never run
out of unturned stones . "
To the British Travel Association , doing their excellent
darndest , I offer these sad complexities . IN the 1830's
the Luddites took sledge-hammers to their looms and
many a good trade unionist since then has , in the
hope of improving the lot of his fellow workers , taken
the theoretical Luddite hammer again .
Hence the hostility to automation and
the stop-watch manufacturing methods that
have # led to restrictive practices . Now a new
threat to those who toil and spin has been
developed by a firm specialising in electronics
in Los Angeles . They have developed a new
system whereby completely untrained workers
can be taught their trade by means of tape
recordings and television .
What happens is that the unskilled worker
is processed , by high-speed listening to recorded
instructions on how to do the job coupled with
explanatory TV pictures , into becoming a highly
skilled , obedient craftsman in no time at all .
Not only can the raw human mind be
technically equipped very quickly to do one
set of skilled manufacturing processes in one
trade but , by being given another of the new
audio-TV training techniques , he can be switched
to a different industry if he just gives in and
From being an assembler in an aircraft
factory to becoming a paint sprayer in
a ceramic factory , he can be qualified
for a completely new job in less time
than it takes to say " Tolpuddle
Martyrs ! " " CRICKET , " says the Oxford
Dictionary , is " an open air game played
with ball , bats and wickets between
# two sides consisting of eleven players
each . " Not so , dear Oxford Dictionary .
You are out of date . Cricket in 1961 is played
with a theodolite , six surveyors , a ball ;
bats and wickets between two sides . Shades
of the village stalwarts of Hambledon who
are now the patron saints of the game !
What would THEY have thought of
these civil engineers creeping about
the pitch with their optical
instruments ?
The village green is the real home of cricket . A couple of bumps
on a pitch have no terrors for a good batsman with a stout
heart , a firm grip on the willow and a hefty contempt for
batting averages and all the statistical blight that makes a
mighty six these days as rare as frostbite in summer .
They 'll be clapping the man who plays a straight theodolite next .
EICHMANN continues # to reveal the extraordinary divisions of the
German mind . Not content with arguing that he was only an
efficient cog in the machine , he now claims that part of the
endless massacre that led to the death of six million Jews was
" decent , feasible and workable . "
He feels satisfaction " from the fact that my personality had been
tested and weighed and not found wanting . " He feels like
Pontius Pilate who washed his hands before the multitude
saying : " I am innocent of the blood of this just person . "
Like Dr. Globke , whom I interviewed the other day , Eichmann
said :
" I drew a certain solace from the fact that I did what I
could despite my low rank . " Eichmann is on dangerous ground
when he pleads that he was only a small unit on the base
of the triangle that led to Hitler , Himmler , Hess and Goering
at the apex . In examination he betrayed an expert and
intimate knowledge of every link in the chain of command that
led to the top .
He understood the whole apparatus with an exact and
meticulous comprehension that could only have come from a man
who used the system - and used it with power and authority .
The appalling thing about the Germans is that they can kid them-
selves and feel a sense of righteousness when their hands are
red with blood .
They really believed that the Treaty of Versailles
was an iniquitous injustice . When they burst into
Czechoslovakia , Poland , Holland , Belgium and France
they really believed Hitler when he screamed at
them that they were being " encircled . " They really
believed in the moral superiority of " The New
Order " which Himmler on October 4 , 1943 , expressed
thus : " Whether nations live in prosperity or starve
to death like cattle interests me only in so far as we
need them as slaves to # our Kultur ; otherwise
it is of no interest to me .
This concept of slavery included Britain .
General Brauchitsch signed a directive
ordering that after the successful
invasion of our islands all the " able-bodied
male population between the ages of
seventeen and forty-five will , unless the
local situation calls for an exceptional
ruling , be interned and dispatched to the
Continent . " The Baltic States were
to have been our destination .
In no other conquered country , not even
Poland , had the Germans begun with such a
thankless task . But they do not make
Their demands are invariably couched in
hectoring , out-of-date language , but in spite of all
their bluster , they let many a big fish through the
net while they are bullying the minnows . I have just
A young chap I know got his first job last week . He
is paid monthly in arrears and will not get
a bean for the next twenty-one days .
It was called " Abou Ben Adhem and the
Angel . " I don't know why I was so
impressed with this poem but , on re-
flection , it might be that I took a
guilty interest in the devilment busi-
ness . I may well have felt that I was
hell-bound under a strict Presbyterian
come through the sugary sentiments
of " Abou Ben Adhem . "
SOME 17 years ago , in the early summer of 1934 ,
the German ambassador in London was dictating
a secret report to his chief von Papen , in Berlin .
" Britain is uncomfortable in her role of champion
of German rearmament , in opposition , to France . "
Later that year he warned that Britain knew
Germany was breaking the agreement to stop
building bombers , and added :
" Without Britain's tolerance German rearma-
ment in the air would be jeopardised . " When
were captured and published after the war the
clear . At nazi Germany's request , Britain was
providing the cloak for Germany to build an
air force bigger than that of France .
Yesterday West German Defence Minister ,
Herr Strauss , started talks with the British
Defence Minister , Mr. Watkinson . Their talks
are another stage in the cloak operation ,
1961 variety , by which the West German
militarists are advancing their rearmament .
that his policy was to make his country
the " strongest militarily in Europe and the
United States' principal Nato ally . "
His job is to build up the military apparatus which
will back West Germany's economic domination of Western
Europe through the Common Market . He continued this week
the argument with Mr. Watkinson which he had in public at a
Nato council meeting last year over the question : do we
fight a 30-day war or a 90-day war ?
A 90-day war , the West German
view , provides the pretext for huge
German armed forces ( within Nato
of course ) and for those to have
bases all over Western Europe .
In the past year West Germany
has secured agreements for
" facilities " in France , Holland and
Belgium . After much bargaining
the British Government has
agreed to give similar " facilities "
The process has been too slow for Herr
Strauss and last month he attacked
plans for a " unified supply apparatus "
in Nato . ( A supply apparatus which would
" facilities . " ) By the end of the year there
will be 11 German divisions in Nato
compared with four divisions of
British troops .
Alongside these divisions a force of over 600
Starfighters provided by the Americans is growing
up . These " fighters " are in fact fighter bombers
which could launch an atomic attack on
Eastern Europe . By 1963 the Germans plan to have
nine missile battalions , with 288 missiles and
36 firing ramps , including weapons like Matador
( range 950 miles ) , also provided by the Americans .
All this has been achieved through Nato under
American leadership . But a big role has been
played not only by the British Government but
helped build up Nato and rearm Western Germany ,
in pursuit of the old familiar anti-Soviet
policy which brought disaster in 1939 .
Now the argument is being used that Nato must be maintained
and Britain must stay in it to keep the Germans in
control . Nato , far from being a means of controlling
the German militarists , is , in fact , the cover for
building up their power . What must Britain do ? Today ,
again , she has a key role . Let her tell men like Strauss
that he shall have no bases or " facilities , " no help in
his quest for atomic arms .
A policy which breaks with military
alliances like Nato and seeks friendship
with the Soviet Union can prevent another
betrayal like that of the '30s . Shipbuilding
Draughtsmen , writing in his personal capa-
city : * # I WAS pleased to read J. R. Camp-
bell's article , for , as president of a union
which fought for and still stands on the
policy decisions established at the Scar-
borough Labour Party Conference I am
appalled at the character of the current
to the two major conferences of the movement and
down # unambiguous alternatives to
for them .
When Scarborough carried our point of view
we were naturally delighted , more so because
the alternatives had been put clearly to the
movement , which had then chosen a vigorous
anti-Nato , anti-Tory , anti-bomb and anti-German
rearmament policy . Hopes rose as we saw a
understood that the bread-and-butter struggles
For we have always felt , even
if we have then by our practice
ignored it , the inconsistency
between support for the war
alliance , with resulting colossal
spending on armaments , and our
basic effort to improve living
standards . Instead , we saw the
Gaitskellites using the position
of organisational dominance
established during their years
around frantically to overturn them next
by misrepresentation of the decisions ,
a demand that the movement unite
and no other seems to have done the
It would become easy to become cynical and
to despair . And yet , wherever the issues were put
clearly , sections of the movement reaffirmed their
original stand . Only where the issues were
posed so as to cause doubt and confusion
were positions lost . It is my view that this
immediate confusion hides the fact that the
Peace movement is still advancing and that
clarification of the issues can bring a
majority to # secure the Scarborough
decisions .
Powerful units have stood firm .
In unions where the central issues
were confused , clear policy details -
as on bases - were decisively carried .
This , and the numbers of active
workers who are beginning to understand
how and why the trick was done ,
provides a strong , immediate basis
for a campaign against weak and
doubtful positions , and for a consistent
peace policy .
All recent events show how correct the
Scarborough decisions were . The Kennedy
Administration's sharpened policies , the
speeded-up drive to improve West
Germany's armament , the new attempt
to rush Britain into the European Common
Market , and the kite-flying on Spain
present a whole new proof that to abandon
Scarborough is to expose Britain and her
working class to sharp new dangers - that
Gaitskellism is bankrupt .
Ordinary working people will never
rally to defend a policy founded on
political chicanery or elect a Labour
Government to carry through Tory policy -
Gaitskell's stupid hope . The tragedy is
that enormous inroads could already
have been made into Tory strength by
a fighting policy , based on Scarborough .
THE desire for unity in the Labour and
trade union movement following the
At the same time that unity cannot be
established on a false basis , or by creating
further confusion within the movement . Unity
will never be established on the basis of leaders
being a law unto themselves and opposing
conference decisions when it suits their own
convenience . Unity can never be established by
any formula uniting those who oppose German
and those who are for this policy - which is the
same as that of the Tory Government .
It is impossible for Labour's new Defence state-
ment to unite the movement as the Labour
leaders are not only in favour of American
bases , but are in favour of German bases and
troops being trained on British soil . The new
Defence statement , while accepting that Britain can-
not remain an independent nuclear Power , now
supports the policy of depending on American
nuclear weapons and the H-bomb , placing
Britain in an even more dangerous position .
The statement of Padley and Crossman is no
different in principle to the new defence statement .
They accept American nuclear bases , and also
the use of nuclear weapons and nuclear strategy
by their talk of political and collective control
clear who controls the American H-bomb , and
the button for nuclear warfare .
There is only one way to develop unity and
at the same time defend Britain . This
was shown at the Scottish Trades Union
Congress , representing 800,000 organised
trade unionists , when it decided by overwhelming
votes , to reaffirm the Scarborough decisions
on unilateral disarmament , and to oppose
Polaris and military bases being installed on
the Holy Loch , or any other part of Britain .
Such a policy would unite the whole movement
and lay the basis for the defeat of the
present Tory Government , which has become a
real menace to the British people both in
home and foreign policy . It is quite evident
that the movement will go on record against
the Polaris base and facilities for German bases
and military training .
This should strengthen the campaign to
end the manufacture and use of
nuclear weapons in Britain . Britain then
all nuclear strategy and weapons of mass
destruction , and lay the basis for real
peace and progress . WHEN all the
This week of window dressing will not prevent
most of the hopeful 15-year-olds leaving school
in six weeks time from ending up in blind alley
jobs . It needs more than 10,000 church parades
and open days at techs , more than descents into
Brighton's sewers or balloon ascents over
Wolverhampton for Britain's technical training to
catch up with the space age .
The heli-hopping Duke of Edinburgh ,
will not keep us abreast of the
scientific revolution . Out of the 550,000
young people aged 15-17 starting
work in 1960 420000 ( 73 per cent )
went into unskilled work . The per-
centage is expected to swell to 80
next year . The Duke , possibly
speaking from experience , stated :
But the Duke is wrong when he implies that young people
prefer unskilled jobs . Countless numbers who want training
are denied it . One area electricity board in 1958
offered six craft apprenticeships and received 450
applications , of whom 100 were considered suitable by
the board . There were only 17 vacancies for the 58
boys who passed the Admiralty exams for Rosyth
dockyard last year .
The production by Bill Duncalf
compressed a long and sometimes rambling
story into a concentrated comprehensive
survey of a life work . P. J. K. HANS WERNER
unambiguously " contemporary " work to be
admitted to the Glyndebourne canon . By no
means a masterpiece , it is in many respects
a representative modern work and the composer
The libretto , by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman ,
is largely a satire on the petty court
surrounding an ageing poet , whose deeply
egocentric character leads him to sacrifice
everything to his need of inspiration . Henze
obtains his musical characterisation by means
intervals , and the result is often less delineation
The evil that Byron did certainly lived after
him , and was even outmatched by the
mischief perpetrated by almost every person
who had been close to him . In turning over
the bones Doris Langley Moore has brought
to light a great deal of discreditable
behaviour and a vision of mischief-
making propensities of the leisured
classes in the early 19th century which
leaves one a little breathless .
AFTER ten days of intermittent , near fatal
ennui , the eleventh Berlin International
Film Festival was suddenly jolted back to
life by two extraordinary films , Bernhard
Wicki's " Das Wunder des Malachias " ( " The
Miracle of Father Malachias " ) and Michael-
angelo Antonioni's " La Notte . " The num-
ber of German film directors who have
made first rate works in the last 25 years
can be counted on the fingers of one
It would now seem that Wicki's name must
be added to this list , for his new film
may well be a landmark in the revitali-
sation of the German cinema . Wicki is
not only a director . He began his career
as an actor , had his first important
film ro*?5le in Ka"utner's " Die letzt
Bru"cke , " and he also appears in the
new Antonioni film .
In 1950 he began to take photographs not
only in Germany but also in Africa and
America . An exhibition of these works which
is now on view in a Berlin gallery is most im-
pressive . As Friedrich Du"rrenmatt , the Swiss
playwright and author , wrote : " Wicki's blacks
and greys are not only the colours of the
lost and the forgotten , but they are also the
technical means of abstraction .
Every unnecessary detail , all superfluous local
colouring must be eliminated . He does not
want the accuracy of a police photograph ,
but rather he wants to show the eternal in
every instant . " The chilling horror of " Mala-
chias " is due as much to Wicki the photo-
grapher as to Wicki the director . His earlier
film , " Die Bru"cke , " was equally terrifying ,
but here the director moves out of the world
of reality into an icy supernatural vacuum
Following Bruce Marshall's original novel with
considerable fidelity , the film tells the story
of a little monk who prays that a disrepu-
table night club near his church be re-
moved . One night his prayer is answered
and the offending establishment is suddenly
transplanted to an island in the North Sea .
But Father Malachias's troubles have only
begun . Instead of having the desired effect ,
the miracle becomes exploited by a group
Soon a carnival springs up on the sight of
the missing building . The Church rebukes the
poor monk for his miracle , and as a
crowning indignity the night club is
given a gala society reopening on the
island . Father Malachias goes to the island ,
prays , and in a second miracle the
night club is replaced in its original
setting .
A summary of the story can give almost
indication of the scope of Wicki's artistry . He
tells his story best in the faces of his crowds ,
recording every wrinkle and drop of sweat
with brutal honesty , building up to a
tremendous climax in the island orgy .
Here , the guests arrive in ghost-like yachts ,
the wildly flapping white sails slashed by
the glaring beacon of a lighthouse .
When the final miracle does occur , it is accepted as a
marvellous joke ; no one has learned anything . Wicki
suddenly returns to the city for a final epilogue . In
complete silence he shows the faces of people
walking in the streets , smug , content , satisfied ,
and thoroughly frightening . Wicki has
succeeded in his second film in
recording his personal apocalypse of the
last days of a sick society .
It is most unfair to call " Malachias " a cut-rate
" Dolce Vita , " for it is far more intimate and deeply
felt . In 1944 Herbert Selpin tried a similar feat
in " Titanic " by paralleling the last days of the
Third Reich with the sinking of the great ocean liner ,
and paid for his audacity with his life .
Strangely enough , the Berlin audience received
the film with extreme coolness , much preferring
Jean-Luc Godard's disappointing " Une Femme
est une Femme , " a ninety-one minute hymn
to " Vogue , " " Cahiers du Cinema , " and the
worst aspects of the American cinema . From
a brilliantly funny start , the work fizzles
out into a series of repetitious sight-gags
and personal jokes incomprehensible to the
uninitiated ( including four plugs for Charles
Aznavour ) .
This director is at last being re-evaluated and
given his proper place in the history of the
German film . Most charming was his tongue-in-cheek
" Unheimliche Geschichten " ( 1920 ) , five ghost stories
with a light touch , and there was much to admire
in " Dreyfus " ( 1930 ) and the virtually unknown
but extremely important " 1914 " ( 1931 ) , which
tries to show that it took more than just
Germany to start the First World War .
Sentence Database C02-059
Prizes being what they are , Berlin is unusually
generous in giving everyone something , and silver
bears are awarded in every direction . Both the
Antonioni and Wicki films took high honours ,
and the audience at the awards was particularly
enthusiastic when one Miss Anna Kerima was selected
as best actress for her work in the Godard
film . Gifted with an interesting face , although little
acting ability , she would seem to be well
worth watching in the months to come .
It has a great look of speed and technical fun
about it , of enormous cinematic enjoyment , and
above all of cinematic sense . Much of it has
that air of improvisation , as of off-the-cuff
living , that once seemed so new and so
attractive . The story ( not that the story , in the
sense of plot , matters much ; but in the sense of
situation and movement it matters a lot ) is
that of a man on the run ( Jean-Paul Belmondo ) ,
who spends a few days with an American girl
Belmondo reappears at the Paris Pullman
in Moderato Cantabile ( curiously trans-
lated into Seven Days ... Seven Nights ...
A certificate ) , Peter Brook's film made
in France and shown last autumn at
the London Film Festival . In spite of
magnificent performances from him and
from Jeanne Moreau , this has been fairly
well trounced by the critics wherever it
has appeared . Leisurely , even slow ,
With a large blond youth of quite
dazzling dumbness called Troy
Donahue ; and Claudette Colbert , still
charming amid the nonsense , and Karl
Malden not knowing how to take it ,
all rolling eyeballs like a villain
from East Lynne .
The film version of Miss Shelagh Delaney's
play A Taste of Honey opens at the Leicester
Square Theatre tomorrow . It has been produced
an directed by Mr. Tony Richardson , who is also
part-author with Miss Delaney of the script ,
and the great advantages to be derived from
this unity of conception and control are
everywhere apparent .
The film version of Miss Shelagh Delaney's play A
Taste of Honey opens at the Leicester Square Theatre
tomorrow . It has been produced and directed by
Mr. Tony Richardson , who is also part-author with
Miss Delaney of the script , and the great advantages
to be derived from this unity of conception and control
are everywhere apparent .
apparent .
The film version of Miss Shelagh Delaney's
play A Taste of Honey opens at the Leicester
Square Theatre tomorrow . It has been pro-
duced and directed by Mr. Tony Richardson ,
who is also part-author with Miss Delaney
of the script , and the great advantages to
be derived from this unity of conception and
control are everywhere apparent .
The film version of Miss Shelagh Delaney's
script , and the great advantages to be
control are everywhere apparent .
The film version of Miss Shelagh Delaney's
play A Taste of Honey opens at the
Leicester Square Theatre tomorrow . It has
been produced and directed by Mr. Tony
Richardson , who is also part-author with
Miss Delaney of the script , and the great
advantages to be derived from this unity
of conception and control are everywhere
apparent .
This is not a filmed play . It has been
conceived throughout in terms of the cinema ,
and again and again it is the visual qualities
of the story , and the marriage of the central
characters to their background , which bring
the film so vividly to life . In Fanny , which
also has its premiere tomorrow , the director ,
Mr. Joshua Logan , attempted but failed to create
the atmosphere of a city .
This is not a filmed play . It has been conceived
throughout in terms of the cinema , and again and
again it is the visual qualities of the story , and
the marriage of the central characters to their
background , which bring the film so vividly to life .
In Fanny , which also has its premiere tomorrow ,
the director , Mr. Joshua Logan , attempted but failed
to create the atmosphere of a city .
In A Taste of Honey Mr. Richardson has taken
a town in the industrial North of England
and has made it live . The shabby streets
and wet pavements , the school play-grounds ,
the public monuments and the rubbish
strewn canals - even the worn head-stones
are seen as an integral part of the story .
This is not a filmed play . It has been con-
ceived throughout in terms of the cinema , and
the story , and the marriage of the central
has its premiere tomorrow , the director , Mr.
Joshua Logan , attempted but failed to
create the atmosphere of a city .
This is not a filmed play . It has been conceived
throughout in terms of the cinema , and again
and again it is the visual qualities of the
story , and the marriage of the central charac-
ters to their background , which bring the
film so vividly to life . In Fanny , which
also has its premiere tomorrow , the director ,
create the atmosphere of a city .
ceived throughout in terms of the cinema ,
create the atmosphere of a city .
This is not a filmed play . It has been concei-
ved throughout in terms of the cinema ,
and again and again it is the visual qualities
of the story , and the marriage of the
central characters to their background ,
which bring the film so vividly to life . In
Fanny , which also has its premiere tomorrow ,
the director , Mr. Joshua Logan , attempted
but failed to create the atmosphere of
a city .
In A Taste of Honey Mr. Richardson has
taken a town in the industrial North of England
and has made it live . The shabby streets and
wet pavements , the school play-grounds , the
even the worn head-stones in the churchyard ,
" sacred to the memory of " - are seen as an
integral part of the story .
In A Taste of Honey Mr. Richardson has taken a
town in the industrial North of England and
has made it live . The shabby streets and wet pavements ,
the school play-grounds , the public monuments and
the rubbish strewn canals - even the worn
head-stones in the churchyard , " sacred to the
memory of " - are seen as an integral part of
the story .
churchyard , " sacred to the memory of "
- are seen as an integral part of the
story .
In A Taste of Honey Mr. Richardson has
taken a town in the industrial North of
England and has made it live . The shabby
streets and wet pavements , the school
play-grounds , the public monuments and
the rubbish strewn canals - even the
worn head-stones in the churchyard , " sacred
to the memory of " - are seen as an
integral part of the story .
In A Taste of Honey Mr. Richardson has
taken a town in the industrial North of
grounds , the public monuments and the
rubbish strewn canals - even the worn
part of the story .
In A Taste of Honey Mr. Richardson has
taken a town in the industrial North of
England and has made it live . The shabby
streets and wet pavements , the school
play-grounds , the public monuments and
the rubbish strewn canals - even the worn
head-stones in the churchyard , " sacred to
the memory of " - are seen as an inte-
gral part of the story .
But there is heart in the telling , and an
intense realism in the situation . A young
girl lives in a single dingy room with
her slatternly , promiscuous mother . In such
surroundings she learns sex is something
sordid , and when she experiences it for the
first time herself it is incoherently , clumsily ,
but half inquisitively . As is the case in Fanny
her first lover is a sailor who leaves her
to bear his child and sails away .
But there is heart in the telling , and an intense
realism in the situation . A young girl lives in
promiscuous mother . In such surroundings she
learns sex is something sordid , and when she
experiences it for the first time herself it
is incoherently , clumsily , but half shyly and
half inquisitively . As is the case in Fanny her
first lover is a sailor who leaves her to bear
his child and sails away .
But there is heart in the telling , and an
intense realism in the situation . A young
girl lives in a single dingy room with her
slatternly , promiscuous mother . In such
herself it is incoherently , clumsily , but half
her to bear his child and sails away .
But there is heart in the telling , and an
intense realism in the situation . A young
girl lives in a single dingy room with
her slatternly , promiscuous mother . In such
surroundings she learns sex is something
sordid , and when she experiences it for
the first time herself it is incoherently , clumsily ,
but half shyly and half inquisitively . As
is the case in Fanny her first lover is a sailor
who leaves her to bear his child and sails
away .
But there is heart in the telling , and an
intense realism in the situation . A young
girl lives in a single dingy room with her
slatternly , promiscuous mother . In such
surroundings she learns sex is something
sordid , and when she experiences it for the
first time herself it is incoherently ,
clumsily , but half shyly and half in-
quisitively . As is the case in Fanny her
first lover is a sailor who leaves her to
bear his child and sails away .
In Fanny the pregnant girl is befriended by
an old man . Here it is a young homosexual ,
estranged from women but yet moved by a
strong maternal instinct to the unborn child
as much as to the expectant mother , who acts
as a protector and comforter to her in her
hour of need . He shares her room and gives
pathy - " you need someone to love you while
you are looking for someone to love " .
In Fanny the pregnant girl is befriended by an old
man . Here it is a young homosexual , estranged from
women but yet moved by a strong maternal instinct to
the unborn child as much as to the expectant mother ,
who acts as a protector and comforter to her in her hour
of need . He shares her room and gives her his forlorn
gift of companionship and sympathy - " you need
someone to love you while you are looking for
someone to love " .
comforter to her in her hour of need . He
to love you while you are looking for
someone to love " .
In Fanny the pregnant girl is befriended by
an old man . Here it is a young homosexual ,
estranged from women but yet moved by a
strong maternal instinct to the unborn child
as much as to the expectant mother , who
acts as a protector and comforter to her in
her hour of need . He shares her room and gives
her his forlorn gift of companionship and
sympathy - " you need someone to love you while
you are looking for someone to love " .
In Fanny the pregnant girl is befriended
by an old man . Here it is a young homo-
who acts as a protector and comforter to
and gives her his forlorn gift of com-
to love you while you are looking for
someone to love " .
In Fanny the pregnant girl is befriended
by an old man . Here it is a young homo-
sexual , estranged from women but yet
moved by a strong maternal instinct to
the unborn child as much as to the
expectant mother , who acts as a protector
and comforter to her in her hour of need .
He shares her room and gives her his
forlorn gift of companionship and sympathy -
" you need someone to love you while you
Arguably , the dramatist has committed a
technical error in allowing Irene to speak
for herself ; we would be altogether clearer
in our minds about her if she remained
a flawed but beautiful enigma , seen but not
heard . However , Miss Pinkie Johnstone makes her
few brief scenes effective , and Mr. Dinsdale
Landen , in the longest and most exacting role ,
that of the sergeant , gives a performance of
rare intelligence and restrained power .
Arguably , the dramatist has committed a
technical error in allowing Irene to speak for
herself ; we would be altogether clearer in our
minds about her if she remained a flawed but
beautiful enigma , seen but not heard . However ,
Miss Pinkie Johnstone makes her few brief scenes
effective , and Mr. Dinsdale Landen , in
the longest and most exacting role , that of the
sergeant , gives a performance of rare intelligence
and restrained power .
of rare intelligence and restrained power .
Arguably , the dramatist has committed a
technical error in allowing Irene to speak
for herself ; we would be altogether clearer
in our minds about her if she remained
a flawed but beautiful enigma , seen but
not heard . However , Miss Pinkie Johnstone
makes her few brief scenes effective , and Mr.
Dinsdale Landen , in the longest and most
exacting role , that of the sergeant , gives
a performance of rare intelligence and
restrained power .
Arguably , the dramatist has committed a
technical error in allowing Irene to speak
for herself ; we would be altogether clearer
in our minds about her if she remained
makes her few brief scenes effective , and
exacting role , that of the sergeant , gives a perfor-
mance of rare intelligence and restrained
power .
Arguably , the dramatist has committed a
technical error in allowing Irene to speak
for herself ; we would be altogether clearer
in our minds about her if she remained a
flawed but beautiful enigma , seen but not
heard . However , Miss Pinkie Johnstone
makes her few brief scenes effective , and
Mr. Dinsdale Landen , in the longest and most
exacting role , that of the sergeant , gives a
performance of rare intelligence and restrained
Mr. Bryan Stonehouse's production is quietly
effective , giving full value to the formal elements
of Betti's writing without over-emphasizing
them . Last night's play in the " Play of the
Week " series on independent television , Then
We Fall , by Mr. Paul Ferris , was a morality
on the not unfamiliar theme of the destructive
power of unbridled ambition .
Mr. Bryan Stonehouse's production is quietly
effective , giving full value to the formal elements
of Betti's writing without over-emphasizing
them . Last night's play in the " Play of the
Week " series on independent television , Then
We Fall , by Mr. Paul Ferris , was a morality
on the not unfamiliar theme of the destructive
power of unbridled ambition .
Mr. Bryan Stonehouse's production is quietly
effective , giving full value to the formal
elements of Betti's writing without over-
emphasizing them . Last night's play in the
" Play of the Week " series on independent
television , Then We Fall , by Mr. Paul Fer-
ris , was a morality on the not unfamiliar
theme of the destructive power of unbridled
ambition .
of Betti's writing without over-emphasizing
them . Last night's play in the " Play of the
power of unbridled ambition .
Mr. Bryan Stonehouse's production is
quietly effective , giving full value to the
formal elements of Betti's writing without
over-emphasizing them . Last night's play
in the " Play of the Week " series on
independent television , Then We Fall , by
Mr. Paul Ferris , was a morality on the not
unfamiliar theme of the destructive power
of unbridled ambition .
It went , perhaps , some distance beyond most
treatments of its subject by attempting to
generate a melodramatic inevitability which
left its central character and the world
around him in complete , unredeemable desolation .
We could , perhaps , say whether or not the attempt
succeeded if we had a little more faith in the
way in which Mr. Ferris manipulated his
characters .
It went , perhaps , some distance beyond most
treatments of its subject by attempting to
generate a melodramatic inevitability which
left its central character and the world
around him in complete , unredeemable desolation .
We could , perhaps , say whether or not the attempt
succeeded if we had a little more faith in the
way in which Mr. Ferris manipulated
his characters .
Ferris manipulated his characters .
It went , perhaps , some distance beyond
most treatments of its subject by
attempting to generate a melodramatic
inevitability which left its central character
and the world around him in complete ,
unredeemable desolation . We could , perhaps ,
say whether or not the attempt succeeded
of we had a little more faith in the
way in which Mr. Ferris manipulated
his characters .
It went , perhaps , some distance beyond most
treatments of its subject by attempting to
generate a melodramatic inevitability
which left its central character and the world
faith in the way in which Mr. Ferris mani-
pulated his characters .
It went , perhaps , some distance beyond
most treatments of its subject by attempting
to generate a melodramatic inevitability
which left its central character and the
world around him in complete , unredeemable
desolation . We could , perhaps , say whether
or not the attempt succeeded if we had a
little more faith in the way in which Mr.
Ferris manipulated his characters .
Mr. William Lucas ( Morris ) is always insensi-
tively pushing , Miss Sheila Allen his wife ,
always palely appealing , Mr. James Maxwell ,
the editor , always comically abashed by the
events , and Mr. Aubrey Richards , the father-in-
law , always comically grotesque ; they were
not asked to modulate from their set moods
but played with proper efficiency and , in
the case of Mr. Richards , with lavish and
suitably gaudy colour .
Mr. William Lucas ( Morris ) is always
insensitively pushing , Miss Sheila Allen his
wife , always palely appealing , Mr. James Maxwell ,
the editor , always comically abashed by the
events , and Mr. Aubrey Richards , the father-in-law ,
always comically grotesque ; they were not asked
to modulate from their set moods but played
with proper efficiency and , in the case of Mr.
Richards , with lavish and suitably gaudy
colour .
appealing , Mr. James Maxwell , the editor , always
Richards , the father-in-law , always comically
lavish and suitably gaudy colour .
Mr. William Lucas ( Morris ) is always
insensitively pushing , Miss Sheila Allen
his wife , always palely appealing , Mr.
James Maxwell , the editor , always comi-
cally abashed by the events , and Mr.
Aubrey Richards , the father-in-law , always
comically grotesque ; they were not
asked to modulate from their set moods
but played with proper efficiency and ,
in the case of Mr. Richards , with lavish
and suitably gaudy colour .
Mr. William Lucas ( Morris ) is always insen-
sitively pushing , Miss Sheila Allen his wife ,
always palely appealing , Mr. James Maxwell ,
the editor , always comically abashed by
the events , and Mr. Aubrey Richards , the
they were not asked to modulate from
their set moods but played with proper
Mr. William Lucas ( Morris ) is always insensi-
tively pushing , Miss Sheila Allen his wife ,
always palely appealing , Mr. James Maxwell ,
the editor , always comically abashed by
the events , and Mr. Aubrey Richards , the
father-in-law , always comically grotesque ;
they were not asked to modulate from
their set moods but played with proper
efficiency and , in the case of Mr. Richards ,
with lavish and suitably gaudy colour .
Only Mr. Lucas's actions , therefore , arose
explicably from appreciable motives . The rest ,
one feels , were driven to effective action by
the author in spite of the ineffectuality
with which he had endowed them . One
hopes that he is not asking us to believe
that , because of their odd accents , they
act oddly like the queer foreigners of
tradition .
Only Mr. Lucas's actions , therefore , arose
explicably from appreciable motives . The
rest , one feels , were driven to effective action
by the author in spite of the ineffectuality
with which he had endowed them . One hopes
that he is not asking us to believe that ,
because of their odd accents , they act oddly
like the queer foreigners of tradition .
of the ineffectuality with which he had
endowed them . One hopes that he is not
of tradition .
Only Mr. Lucas's actions , therefore , arose
explicably from appreciable motives . The
rest , one feels , were driven to effective
action by the author in spite of the
ineffectuality with which he had endowed
them . One hopes that he is not asking
us to believe that , because of their odd
accents , they act oddly like the queer
foreigners of tradition .
Only Mr. Lucas's actions , therefore , arose
explicably from appreciable motives . The
queer foreigners of tradition .
Only Mr. Lucas's actions , therefore , arose
explicably from appreciable motives . The
rest , one feels , were driven to effective
action by the author in spite of the
ineffectuality with which he had endowed
them . One hopes that he is not asking us
to believe that , because of their odd
accents , they act oddly like the queer
foreigners of tradition .
NEXT month that friendly , effervescent performer Frankie
Vaughan will burst on to the London Palladium stage
in a new show . To paraphrase his well-known ditty :
" He 'll have the limelight , they 'll give him the girls -
and leave the rest to him . "
I have a hunch that he will feel more at home in the
old , star-studded West End than he will ever feel in
Hollywood . His American bosses , 20th-Century Fox , have
recently given Frankie the full , razzamataz , red-carpet
treatment . But they haven't done a thing for his film
career that Anna Neagle and Herbert Wilcox were not
doing better here , before the platinum-plated Hollywood
carrot was dangled before his nose .
In his first Hollywood picture , " Let 's Make Love , " he
was swamped by the know-how of Marilyn Monroe
and Yves Montand . Against this couple Frankie , in
a cardboard role , didn't stand a chance . Now comes
" The Right Approach " ( Rialto , " A " ) , and it 's a glum
business . He plays an aspiring actor - a
selfish , arrogant , brash , ambitious , unscrupulous heel -
who would tread on anybody's neck to get a break in
the Hollywood ratrace .
He double-crosses the five pals with whom he lives ,
cheats a waitress ( Juliet Prowse ) and cynically uses
a magazine editress ( Martha Hyer ) to get ahead .
Frankie Vaughan is too nice a chap to ring quite
true as a smooth-tongued , ill-mannered Yank . His
best moments are when he swings breezily into the
title song .
But 6,000 miles seems a heck of a way to go
for a new hit song . He might be well advised to
think hard and long before his next jump into the
Hollywood arena .
VERDICT : Vaughan should have by-passed this approach .
RONALD Lewis has just left for his first taste of the
Hollywood treatment , thanks to a sound performance in
" Taste of Fear " ( Warner Theatre , " X " ) .
He has earned his break . The film is a well-made
variation on that sinister yarn in which half the cast
try to persuade the heroine that she is out of her mind .
Despite flagrant cheating the eerie atmosphere is
built up neatly . Susan Strasberg is the crippled
damsel in distress .
Stepmother Ann Todd and doctor Christopher Lee are
also effectively around . They provide some chilly red
herrings in this " Find-the-body " thriller . VERDICT :
Don't believe all you see and hear !
James has pumped life into a slim , strained
comedy . He does his rescue act in " Double Bunk "
( Leicester-square Theatre , " A " ) .
Navigator Sid is a tower of strength when
newly-weds Ian Carmichael and Janette Scott let
loose their ancient houseboat on a honeymoon trip down
the river . The film starts off brightly enough but ,
half-way through , the plot ( as well as the boat ) springs
a near-disastrous leak . Familiar members of Britain's
repertory team of comedy character-actors jump through
Gillies , " The Takers . " A polished production
by Mr. Houston's accomplished
performance as the master mind behind a
gang of crooks .
This plot to rob a French millionaire of 300,000
well . But it was Mr. Houston's evening .
Earlier , on the Palladium show I found Stanley
Their offering last night differed little
from their earlier act on this show a week
and brother Fred , were in bright , zestful
Whitehall farce last night , looked like
a rabbit warren in a field of corn .
I can't recall a production where so many
comics bolted in and out of holes so often .
The jokes were a reshuffle of the same old
the cast . I especially liked the tea-cup
scene where six of the cast changed
Carole Shelley as the newly-wed and Larry Noble
as Smiler Perkins were the most laughable . They
alone used a sharp edge to their humour and cut
through the gormless standing corn around them . Perhaps
it was accidental - I hope not . If ever a bag of
humour needed a thorough shaking up the Whitehall
farce is it when it comes to television .
HOW do you get on records ? Well , you 've got
to have something different . Sing slightly flat .
All the good singers sing in tune . Twang a guitar
slightly off key . Everybody 's fed up with the
right way - so the best-seller charts say . Play
an OLD 2pianna instead of a new one . You got to
get it into your head , son ... people
don't like things as they should be - not on
record , anyway .
Thus , musician David Lisbon's chances of being a starred
disc solo pianist were greatly enhanced when he dug out
A PACKET OF DRAWING-PINS . " Why not , " thought ex-soldier
Mr. Lisbon , who is twenty-three , and lives in Dagenham , Essex ,
" press a thumb-tack into the nose of the hammers that strike
the piano strings ? " He did , on his piano at home . There weren't
enough tacks and he got only the middle hammers done .
Then he tried it out for sound . Um-chink ...
um-chink ... it went . Slightly flat and jangly in
part . DELIGHTFUL ! He put the sound on tape . The
tape went to the Philips company . Within two
days Mr. Lisbon had a record contract . And they
hauled his thumb-tacked joanna the thirteen
miles to London for his first session .
Now along comes his solo disc , featuring two of his own
compositions , " Deerstalker " and " Almost Grown Up . " VERDICT :
Mr. Lisbon has it taped . And tacked . And he says : " Just as well
I had only one box of tacks - it might have been so
different ... . " More news from the ivory-thumping dept. ...
Russ Conway , who has tinkled his way to fame on an old 2pianna ,
comes in with another of his own works : " Parade of the
Poppets " ( Columbia ) .
But not one of his nimble-fingered best . GERMANY'S Russ
Conway is a pianist who calls himself CRAZY OTTO . But
nothing crazy about his pianistics . He pounds merrily away
at a piece called " Piccadilly " ( Polydor ) . I find it cute .
American pianist Floyd Cramer , who played for Elvis on " It 's
Now or Never , " looks like having a success on his own with
" On the Rebound " ( RCA ) .
NEW boy on the vocal front is
Rolly Daniels , who comes 5,000 miles
Europe . Now Rolly gets his big break - a
record , the modern Aladdin's lamp of
show business .
Become a success with a disc and hey presto ! You 're a star ... . Rolly sings with
assuredness " Bella Bella Marie " ( Parlophone ) , a lively song that changes tempo mid-way .
I don't think he will storm the charts with this one , but it 's a good start .
CHRIS CHARLES , 39 , who lives in Stockton-on-Tees , is an accountant .
He is also a director of a couple of garages . And he finds time as well to be a lyric
writer . He writes with Tolchard Evans , composer of " Lady of Spain " and other big hits .
Tolch , as he is known in Tin Pan Alley , likes songs with a month in the title . He wrote
" My September Love , " the big David Whitfield hit of 1956 .
" Let 's have another song with a month in it , " said Tolch . Mr.
Charles obliged with " April Serenade . " This week it appears , a
Russell Turner , 33 , provides his last programme for the B B C tonight
with Robert Harbin's " Mystery and Magic " ( 7.30 ) . After six years
directed " Six-Five Special , " Turner is aiming to go into free-lance
T V , film and stage production work .
" I feel I 've done all I can at the B B C , " he
told me . " We mutually agreed to part . "
Escapologist Dill-Russell is a guest in Harbin's
show tonight . Boxing fans can see an eight-round
feather-weight contest between Chris Elliot and
Harry Carroll from Leicester ( B B C , 8.25 ) . A
SONGS-OF-BRITAIN medley is sung by David
Hughes in his " Make Mine Music " ( B B C , 9.30 p.m. ) .
The numbers include " Scotland the Brave , " " Men of Harlech , "
" McNamara's Band , " " Greensleeves " and " English Rose . "
Fay Compton stars in " No Hiding Place " ( I T V , 9.35 p.m. ) .
She plays the possessive mother of a man whose hobby revolves
round a doll's house .
THREE people will be hypnotised in tonight's " Lifeline "
( B B C , 10.15 ) .
They will be asked to comment on the design of everyday articles
such as a chair and a motor-car . The idea is to see what happens when
I T V have postponed Malcolm Muggeridge's " Appointment with
playwright Arnold Wesker . " Instead , Muggeridge's appointment
will be with Sir Roy Welensky the Premier of the Federation
of Rhodesia and Nyasaland ( 10.30 p.m. ) .
man could only be regarded as a machine .
Potter screamed during an action , and was arrested . He
vision .
It was a splendid interpretation of the
part . The rest of the cast were well chosen ,
with James Maxwell making a fine job of the
first-class performance last night as a
wartime naval officer in the B B C's
" The Little Key . "
The play was no more than a figment of
the imagination which asked the viewer to
believe in a beautiful ghost . It would have been
an impossible piece of television but for clever
effect . MORE than 100 viewers complained to
the B B C last night that an American film ,
" Britain - Blood , Sweat , and Tears ... Plus
Twenty Years , " was anti-British .
The film replaced " What 's My Line ? " and " Be My
Guest " programmes because of an electricians'
strike . It showed Britain today through the eyes
of an American T V reporter , Eric Sevareid , and
British personalities . Among them - Professor
Dennis Brogan , Shelagh Delaney , and Alan Sillitoe .
The film covered a wide aspect of the British
scene , ranging from pubs , the Eton wall game ,
to the European Common Market .
Shelagh Delaney and Alan Sillitoe attacked
education . It was left to reporter Sevareid
to make the strongest criticisms . He said
that in the race of the modern nations ,
Britain was slipping behind ... .
IT is mid-morning on a Dublin Sunday . The streets
are tranquilly sunny and still , for the town
is at Mass . Most of it . In the front room of
a house in Anglesey-road is a congregation who
never actually got to church , but who are
gathered with devotion around Brendan Behan
and a brandy bottle .
amber inches in the bottle . Present are some
hard-core Friends of Brendan . They listen
roller-coaster , with occasional stops for an old
I.R.A. air or a Connemara tear-jerker .
ALSO present is a London journalist who
arrived two hours earlier by appointment
to talk to the author of Borstal Boy and
The Hostage about his new work , if any ,
and who is now being pluckily convivial
to fight off the frustration . The telephone
has rung a couple of times , calls from
other chums sniffing the wind and
offering to drop by for a chat .
relief - turns his attention to
flower in a cultural desert . " Now , me - I 'm
a journalist , I write to entertain rather
than educate . And I don't write at all
unless I 'm exceedingly 2skint . " But I 'll
say this . I 'd like to live in America
and do some writing there .
It 's a very free place to write in , and there 's
the advantage that no one knows what
you 're writing about anyway . " Not that I did
much when I was over this past two times ,
not with that great little Irish bar on
Seventh Avenue , The Pigsty , always open .
I was there , in even faster orbit , when that
third astronaut went up - what 's his name ?
I 'm the only man on earth who doesn't know
what his name is . Don't tell me . I want to
preserve that distinction . " I already know about
Shepard and that Salvation Army chap Gagarin -
the two biggest bores since Cardinal Newman .
That 's enough of all that hooey . " HE plunges
on into reminiscences of his trips . There is
much to recall .
Among other incidents he was banned from New
York's St. Patrick's Day parade as a " disorderly
person . " He was in a fight after telling a
Canadian , during a chat about space-flight :
" Ireland will put a shillelagh into orbit , Israel
will put a matzo ball into orbit , and Lichtenstein
will put a postage stamp into orbit before you
Canadians put up a mouse . "
And he suffered an alcoholic
seizure and was gravely ill in
hospital with a diabetic and heart
condition . His return to Dublin was
heralded by the announcement that
he was " off the gargle - a retired
alcoholic . " Since then he has been
heard of often in the newspapers -
three times up before the beaks for
drunk and disorderly conduct .
LESS has been heard of Brendan's work . It is now
five years since his first play , The Quare Fellow , was
produced , three years since Borstal Boy was published
and The Hostage was put on . What has happened to
the play , Richard's Cork Leg , begun 18 months ago
and due for presentation at the Theatre Royal ,
Stratford , last spring ? It was never finished .
What happened to the new book partially tape-recorded
by his publishers in March of last year ? Still a skeleton . Yet
I have before me now a 12,000-word manuscript of
a book planned to be called Confessions of an Irish
Rebel which was delivered to his agents in June . IT
begins : " There was a party to celebrate Deirdre's
return from her abortion in Bristol . "
It is ribald , funny , brilliantly observant
of character , and authentic as a glass
of draught porter . But will we see its
end ? The last scene of this fragment
is in a pub where the author throws a
10 note on to the bar and orders a
round for the pals , one of whom cries :
I AM happy to report that I saw some-
thing this week I have never before witnessed ,
perfect timing and technique . It gives one loud ,
clear hiccup and falls flat on its back . This
brilliant budge , I may add , gets no credit
in the cast list of Come September ( Odeon ,
Leicester-square ) , which suggests that it
is either using a stand-in for the stunt
The performance of our talented
feathered friend is not the only
good thing ( although the one original
touch ) in the film , which is better-
styled , European set . Most of it has
been shot in and around the
the Dolce Vista for the picture ) in
It also parades Gina Lollobrigida in a selection of neglige*?
2e-and-nightie ensembles not too well designed for sleeping in ,
Mr. Hudson is an American millionaire who spends each
September in his Italian villa and the company of Signorina
Lollobrigida . In the holiday seasonal months before and
after this annual idyll his major-domo ( Walter Slezak
at his most nauseating ) turns the palazzo into a luxury
hotel .
#
Inevitably there comes the time when Mr. Hudson suddenly breaks
with tradition and arrives there in July , when , just as
inevitably , the place is full of American teenagers on an
escorted tour . Result : Mr. Hudson and lady love Lollo find
themselves playing chaperon ( Brenda de Banzie , the official
one , has broken a leg ) to the girls , who have just
been joined by a Jeep-load of boys .
It 's hereabouts that the budge takes to the bottle , but I
don't think it was through boredom . The film is funny enough
in places and has a line or two of painful home truths
thrown in . " I don't want to talk like an adult , " screams
failed to make an honest woman of her .
" That 's how I got into all this trouble . "
" He 's got to be 35 , " says Bobby Darin ,
the chief spokesman of the jeans-and-
Jeep brigadiers as they 're scheming to
get rid of old man , solid Rock . " How
many hills can he take ? " Of course Mr.
Hudson can take one more hill than the
youngsters .
So all ends as you know it will , with the
middle-aged romancers respectably wed and
Master Darin going steady with the delectable
Sandra Dee ( to whom , I believe , he is married
in real life ) . Miss Dee , incidentally , who keeps
turning up as the typical teenager in all the
" good girl " parts ( Tuesday Weld gets the " bad girl "
ones ) , is becoming quite an accomplished actress .
The girl is a knock-out ( see pic-
ture of Julie Newmar for con-
firmation ) . She also has quite a
mission in mind . She , " younger ,
prettier , stronger , and more
intelligent " than the wife ( as she
soon tells her ) , wants to have the
perfect baby . And she has chosen
the husband ( James Mason ) , who
is an academic friend of her
Nobel prize-winning father to be
This sort of situation calls for some subtle ,
slightly sardonic handling . It doesn't get it . But
The Marriage-Go-Round is not entirely a waste of
Studies attached to some American universities
the subject Social Psychology used to be called
Home-making and is now known as Domestic
Relations .
Susan Hayward plays the wife sharply
a glower . And Miss Newmar is a
According to the script she was once
captain of the junior hockey team at
her school . So help me so was I .
IL GRIDO ( The Cry ) - Paris Pullman -
is an earlier essay in atmospheric
meandering by the L'Avventura man ,
Michelangelo Antonioni .
ON a March evening in 1932 in the New
Jersey family household the nursemaid
tiptoed into the baby's room to see that
20-month-old Charles Jun. was sleeping .
that there was no sound of breathing .
She thrust out her hand - and felt
emptiness . A FEW minutes later the father
gripping a loaded rifle , told his wife :
to the raree-show emotionalism
era .
The second said that the problems which arise from the comparisons with
the Synoptics can be reasonably solved by paying due regard to the time and
plan and to the different public for which , or against which , the author wrote .
The third article excluded any allegorical interpretation of the Gospel .
There is a whole group of theories which attempt to explain the problems of the
Fourth Gospel by explanations based on assumed textual dislocations . The
present state of the Gospel is the result of an accident-prone history . The
original was written on a roll , or codex , which fell into disorder or was
accidentally damaged . An editor , who was not the author , made what he
could of the chaos by placing the fragments , or sheets , or pages , in order .
Most of those who expound a theory of textual
dislocation take it for granted that the Gospel was
written entirely by one author before the
disturbance took place but a few leave it open
to suppose that the original book had been
revised even before the upheaval . The ingenuity
of the theories is impressive and is the best
argument against them .
Thomas Spreng
The one real weakness of the Commentator's
case is that , in common with all his colleagues ,
he has not , until now , been able to exhibit exactly
how this enlargement was effected nor has he
been able to explain the textual movements by
showing that such changes are part of a
simple and coherent plan . To understand how
this is possible it is necessary to examine the
text of the Gospel .
THE Fourth Gospel was almost certainly
written in Greek . A modern text of the
Gospel represents the work of generations of
scholars who have compared the many manu-
scripts of John and worked out the version
which is most likely to have been the original
wording . It is not possible to establish any one
text with absolute precision .
The most convenient one for the authors
has been the text of A. Souter . In this
version of the text the Fourth Gospel is
printed as just over 1,000 different nouns ,
verbs , and other parts of speech occurring
15,695 times in their different grammatical
forms . There are other texts which could
have been used , and ( as shown in Table 1 )
it is not a matter of the greatest importance
which text is used .
At first sight the difference between
Souter and the other texts is rather
large . But the British text includes
the paragraph 7.53-8.11 , the Woman
taken in Adultery , and this accounts
for 178 words out of 279 , which is
the difference between the 15,695 words
of Souter's text and the 15,416 of Nestle's .
The omission or inclusion of this paragraph
is a matter of editorial decision rather
The bar was the commonest marking , but others
were also used . Dots sometimes served in place of the
bar , and there are cases where spacing is used as
it is now used to mark a paragraph ending . Frequently
paragraphos markings were omitted . C. H. Roberts is of
the opinion that in the original of the Fourth Gospel
some markings would be used , although which , it is
impossible to say .
Professor E. G. Turner is inclined to take the view that
the original of the Gospel would be unmarked . The
original of the Gospel , whether written on a roll or codex ,
whether paragraphed or not , would be laid out in
columns . This is the invariable practice of ancient
manuscripts . A common size of column would hold
about one third of a page of Souter's print .
The edge of this sheet was attached to a wooden dowel
and the sheet wound round this central pin . The roll made
a simple and serviceable book . It was robust - the number
which have survived the centuries is ample evidence of
this - and it was easily stored . It had two disadvantages . It
was generally a single-sided form of book , and it was not
an easy form of book in which to find a
reference .
This last objection might have had some weight in
ecclesiastical circles . In his Natural History , 13 . 11-12 ,
the elder Pliny tells of the use of papyrus in roll-making .
As Pliny was killed in the eruption of Vesuvius which
overwhelmed Herculaneum and Pompeii in A.D. 79 , his
information is contemporaneous with the New Testament .
The other form of book was the codex . In this the
sheets were bound together down one edge much as
they are in modern books .
Against these advantages the codex was fragile and
might be bulky . It is sometimes possible to tell
whether or not a particular text was written on
a roll or a codex . Rolls were prepared for
writing , but any papyrus left unused at the
end could be cut off . If the text was longer than
the roll , a sheet could easily be glued on .
The verso of the roll was blank , and one
cannot think of an author , Mark for example ,
sending out his Gospel lacking the ending ,
while one whole side of his roll was unused .
The codex form was not so accommodating . Even
in the case of the single-sheet quire , an extra
sheet glued on might have to be gummed on
over the binding , or the whole codex rebound .
Close to the building projects would be the
VINEYARDS ( 1 Kings 4.25 ; S. of Sol. 8.11 ) .
The word is a Persian loan-word ,
pairi-deaza , from which our word paradise
is derived . Qoheleth has a second
paradise at his disposal but he is
no happier than Adam was !
The word is used in the singular
in Neh. 2.8 and S. of Sol. 4.13 .
A natural transition from gardens and
orchards to the vital question of water
supply . The pools are probably natural springs
enlarged to become reservoirs or cisterns in
the rock . King Mesha of Moab boasts of their
construction in lines 9 , 23-25 of the Moabite Stone ,
which read : And I built Baal-meon and made
in it the reservoir ... and I made both the
reservoirs for water inside the town .
According to the legend , Solomon had asked the
Prince of the Demons , " Ashmodeus " to bring him
the Shamir and Ashmodeus told him that the
Shamir had not been placed under his charge , as
there is no Shamir in Gehenna ( Hell ) . An eagle
brought the Shamir to Solomon from Eden ,
the Paradise , the only place where the Shamir
could be found .
The Talmud describes that the Shamir lives in
a sanctuary , and only some rare birds know
the existence of it . These birds are , the Cherubim
and the Seraphim . We are also told that the Shamir
is the stylus used by Moses , and this stylus is described
as a very precious diamond-stone and very adamant .
The word Shamir was used as a
personal name ( Git. 68a ) . The Hebrew
word " SHAMIR " means guarded or preser-
ved . Therefore , the real man , who
regards himself as insignificant , as the
prayer says : " What am I ? A worm " , he
is the Shamir and such a man fulfils
the Shmah , loves the Lord God with
all his heart , and with all his soul and
word of God .
This man is the worm , the creature that
a man is the Shamir that guards him-
self against all the irrelevant pleasures .
Such a Shamir possesses the real acid
to mould our character , to melt our
us earthly creatures to build an Altar
for God to come nearer to God .
The action of the Shamir writes books and their
books are readable . This Shamir is indeed a rare
diamond that incises the hardest rock , the hardest
facts . And these creatures existed from the
beginning . It is " the stone , which the builders
refused , but it is to become the head-stone
of the corner " . ( Ps. 118 , 22 . ) And the stone shall
tell !
" For the stone shall cry out of the wall " , like
Baalam's ass , " and the purlin of timber shall
creak in answer " " if the roof of our security is
crushing our soul " ( see Hab. 2 , 10-11 ) . And it is
through the Shamir : " That the earth shall be
filled with the knowledge of the Glory of the
Lord , as the waters cover the sea . " ( Hab. 2 , 14 . )
The Shamir's daily life writes the Decalogue ,
which is written on two plates , the hard facts
of life , and all facts are " one " . We have all
a deep impression on our feelings and senses .
They make us the Altar for God to emit
the Light which can be read in every
language . The Shamir is the " seventh " and
most important creature , that was created on
the eve of the Sabbath , to bring the
Sabbath , real peace to the whole world .
Then the whole earth will be His Altar . " And it
shall come to pass , if 1ye shall 1hearken
you this day , to love the Lord your God , and to
serve Him with all your heart and with all
your soul . " This may seem very good , but there
is something deficient .
Under such conditions without putting your
mind together we cannot solve the further
summons of destiny , to solve the economic
problems . Hence says Rabbi Simeon ben
Jochai ( Tanis 6a ) " if Israel does not fulfil
the wish of the Lord , failing to serve the
Lord God with all their visionary power ,
the work will have to be done by each
individual " .
They will not work in union . If physical power , spiritual power
and visionary power is not united , man will remain in his heart
selfish and think only of one's personal advantage to
gratify selfish aims , then each man will gather-in
corn , your wine and your oil .
Freedom from want cannot be fulfilled nor
freedom from fear , fear of starvation in the
midst of plenty . Help will not be easily forth-
coming for the people in need . They will
think of the animals first ( which is of course
our duty ) . Of course the individual will
eat and be full but : " Take heed to yourself ,
that your heart be not deceived , and 1ye turn
aside , and serve other gods , and worship them " ,
the yourself is thy greatest enemy , the self-
seeking self .
And you serve Mammon and God . And you cannot serve
two masters , and you worship self-interest , isolating
yourself , under such conditions the goods are your gods .
" And then the Lord's wrath be kindled against you , and he
shut up the heavens , that there is no rain , and that the land
yield not her fruit and lest 1ye perish quickly from off the
good land which the Lord 1giveth you . "
For without the vision to serve the Lord your God with all
your heart and with all your soul and with all your might
the problem of life cannot be solved . " Therefore shall 1ye lay
up these my words in your heart and in your soul . " The text
adds and in your soul , searching your soul .
And the sequence in the text is different than
in the first part of the Shmah , we have first " and
they may be as frontlets between your eyes . " First to
bind them to have the vision and then " And 1ye
shall teach them to your children . " And as we have go-
ne through the mill , we need not teach them
to the children any more diligently and the
children will grasp now what will befall
them without visionary power .
And we will nail the Divine Law on the
door posts of the house and upon the gates .
" That your days may be multiplied and the
days of your children in the land , which
the Lord swear unto your father to give them ,
as days of HEAVEN ON EARTH " That
means the Kingdom of Messianic Righteousness
( Talmud Sanh. 99A ) .
The Messusah , which is nailed on the doorposts
contains those two lessons . The third lesson
of the Shmah ( Numbers 15 , 37-41 ) is
called " the going-out of the land of
Egypt " . It starts with the story of the fringes
the " tsitsits " . This lesson used to be read
only in the morning . And the Talmud tells a
Rabbi Eleasar ben Assarja said , " I am
nearly seventy and I had not succeeded that
Ben Zoma said : " The days of 1thy life
means in the day-time ; all the days of
1thy life means even at night-time . "
( Berochoth . ) And the Rabbis thought
it important that when we read the
Shmah " to be willing to hear , " we
should remember the Great
Deliverance : Passover and its connection
with the fringes ( the tsitsits ) .
And the tsitsits had a message sealed inside the knots
are used on Passover , to depict the " time of our freedom " .
Charauses ( a kind of fruit mixture in likeness of the
appearance of mortar ) ; and ( 4 ) an attitude to lean
back .
( 1 ) Matzos is deficient bread , ( LECHEM ANJO in Hebrew ) ,
so are we deficient without spiritual knowledge , and to
cure our mental incapacity we should be willing
to learn . Education is always the most important task .
Education gives : Freedom of Speech . ( 2 ) Bitter Herbs
symbolises the bitterness that is hurled against us .
We eat it . We accept it , to show we have self-control
and that God dwells within us .
Self-control gives us : Freedom to worship God . ( 3 ) Salt Water and Charauses :
the salt-water at the Seder-Table represents the Covenant of the Torah
( MELACH BRITH ELOHECHO in Hebrew , Salt is the covenant of 1thy God ,
Levit. 2 , 13 . ) Salt preserves and we should have this salt in
ourselves and have peace with one-another . And the sweet
Mortar ( the CHARAUSES in Hebrew ) that binds all the " hard-
facts " together and explains them , represents the Oral
Tradition .
We dip into both , at the Seder . And we want to understand
more of the Torah and the Oral Tradition , our inheritance .
Living the life of the Torah ( " dipping-in " ) makes us
meek : " But the meek shall inherit the earth ; and shall
delight themselves in the abundance of Peace " ( Psalm 37 ,
11 ) . That gives us freedom from want .
( 1 ) Matzo represents Peshat ; ( 2 ) Moraur
represents Remez ; ( 3 ) Dipping-in represents
Derush ; ( 4 ) Leaning-back represents Saud .
( This is the PARDUS . ) Matzo represents
the literal meaning of Pesach which
is called : The Feast of Matzos . The
Bitter-Herbs represent the spiritual
that is hurled against us . The Salt-water
Leaning back carries the concealed message . And we
start the Seder showing the Matzos , that they rep-
resent the " Bread of Poverty " which our fore-fathers
were eating in Mitzrajim , to show they were willing to learn ;
and we invite anybody who wishes to partake in our
discussions , saying : " Anybody who is hungry , let him come
and eat , Anybody who is thirsty , let him come and
drink . "
And we want all to eat and drink His Great Philosophy of the
four ways of Israel's redemption . Hence " four questions " , which are
really interrogations to examine into the principles of the four re-
demptions are asked at the Seder-evening about these " four
symbols " ( the MANISHTANO ) . And the person who asks these
questions is seeking the opinion of the one who is
conducting the Seder .
And we answer , that the Lord our God gave us " four freedoms "
without which Society cannot make progress . And we drink
" four cups " to thank the Lord our God for the " four
freedoms " which are Divine . There are four ways of
redemption : ( 1 ) I will bring you out from under the
burdens of Egypt . ( 2 ) I will rid you of their bondage .
( 3 ) I will redeem you . ( 4 ) I will take you to me for a
people . ( 1 ) I will bring you out from under the
burdens of Egypt : How was it that Israel was
brought out from under the burdens of Egypt ?
Because , they kept the Passover and they were
eating Matzos in Egypt and the " Feast of Matzos "
was known even to Abraham and Lot .
The new century opened with James 1 ascending
the throne . He was quite prepared to be
tolerant towards Rome though the Gunpowder Plot
spoiled that . The Puritans had high hopes , for
James had grown up in Presbyterian Scotland ,
but those hopes were dashed . True , a new Prayer
Book was issued in 1604 but the Puritans
derived little comfort from it .
They objected to the word Absolution . So the phrase ' or
' or the laying on of hands upon children baptized and
able to render an account of their faith according
remained . Other changes in the Book were equally
minor except for the new section on the Sacraments
added to the Catechism .
This indicated how ephemeral in the Church had
been the mood which produced the Black Rubric , for
it says that ' the Body and Blood of Christ , which are
verily and indeed taken and received by the
faithful in the Lord's Supper . ' It could hardly be more
definite . It was at this time , too , that King James made
himself immortal by becoming associated with
a Bible translation - the Authorized Version
( which was never actually authorized ! ) .
In that year Shakespeare had just turned
forty and had written Hamlet two years
before . Bacon was at work and Milton was
just learning to read . James was followed by
Charles , in whose reign came the Scottish
Prayer Book in 1637 . Significantly this made
a deliberate return to the Book of 1549 and
became the foster mother of some of the most
important Prayer Books in the Anglican
Communion .
Forever associated with Charles is Archbishop Laud ,
now so much nobler a figure than former historians
led us to believe . Laud was enthusiastically hated
by Calvinists and Puritans , and the sentiment was
mutual . But Laud was no Romanizer . One of his
first public acts was a hard-hitting battle with
the Jesuit , Fisher . But anyone who was friendly
with James and Charles , the Puritans argued ,
was necessarily a menace .
Or when he found cock-fighting going on in church ?
Laud made a positive approach . He set out to increase
a sense of reverence . The Prayer Book was to be respected
and so was the office of a bishop . Altars should be
altars and not any broken down , transportable
table which was handy for the most improbable uses .
In the first place it is not a great deal
of use telling even children , as I have
already suggested , not to be silly or
to pull themselves together . Far better
to help them to face whatever it is that
is worrying them , to find the original
cause and then deal with it ; show it
up either for the sham it is - and many
fears are based upon completely
irrational pre-conceived notions - or to
Even worse is to laugh . Tremendous damage may be done to a child
by laughing at what are very real fears . As adults , we know
that their fears are groundless , indeed to us they appear laughable ,
but to a child they are very real . Not that I am suggesting
that children should be molly-coddled - they must be made
to face their fears , to see through them and come out on the
other side as victors .
To ridicule them only pushes them farther
into themselves , so that they become
unable to speak about it to anybody and
the harvest of which may still be being
reaped at forty or fifty . Far better to
agree with a child that a particular
situation is frightening , and then to face
it together until the child can see how
unnecessary its fears were .
Because situations which may contain
all the elements of fear can arise suddenly ,
to some extent against it . To keep a child
of twelve or thirteen under the
happens is not merely dishonest , it
is unwise . As I shall suggest in a
later chapter there are some situations
A little more honesty , even if one refrains from going into
too many details , would help many a child to make a
proper adjustment to life as it grows up . Let us look
at Jesus . We do not , I think , see there a life without fear .
There are several instances where he seemed unable to go
on .
In Gethsemane He prayed that the cup
should pass from Him . Jesus shows us
the way to face life . To see all the latent
frightening possibilities and yet by facing
them and knowing God is with us and
that , with Him , there is nothing that can
finally defeat us . More than that , that God
has something important to do with our
lives and that the nearer we get to Him ,
the stronger we become .
... Today A wonderful thought In the
dawn was given ... And the thought
Was this : That a secret plan Is hid in
my hand ; That my hand is big Big ,
Because of the plan That God , Who
dwells in my hand , Knows this
secret plan , Of the things He will
do for the world Using my hand .
all human emotion , and whose sensitive
nature knows better than we do , what it is to
be really afraid , help us to know that when
we face life boldly , many of the shadows are
seen to be allies and not enemies and that ,
come what may , we are never alone when
we are with Thee .
Amen . MOST people would probably regard tiredness as a
purely physical thing . The cure for which is sleep . This is only
partly true . Many people wake up tired of a morning and no
amount of rest seems to make any difference . Sleep , to be
effective , must be of that child-like quality which comes
from innocence .
To others , the long hours of the night bring
only a disturbed tossing and turning
which causes them to wake feeling worse
than when they went to bed . We may begin
to understand this a little better when we
realize that tiredness itself is largely in
the mind . Very few people , under normal
conditions , work themselves to a standstill .
The mind tires first and conveys the impression
of tiredness to the body . This can be proved by
noting the effect of a new stimulus on some-
body who feels thoroughly tired . Suppose
a mother has news late at night that her
child is in danger . She will undertake a
journey which , an hour before , she would
have declared impossible .
Even more simply , test your own reactions
to different situations . There are some which
bring on an almost immediate feeling of
tiredness - such as when your wife mentions
the washing-up - while others , if they
refer to something you like doing , bring a
veritable surge of energy . Many a girl who
is ' too tired to help mum ' will later jump
up with no apparent tiredness at all when
her boy friend calls and go for a long walk .
Nor is she necessarily being deceitful . She really did feel tired
until the mind got the necessary injection of a fresh - and an
attractive - interest ! Tiredness has , therefore , as much to do
with our mental state as with our physical exhaustion . A
disturbed mind can bring the healthiest body to a sense
of fatigue . They wonder why they get no rest at night ,
even if they do sleep .
They drag themselves around and can become
a burden to their families and their friends .
Any mental confusion can cause this and
the best way is probably to seek advice .
As we are unable to cure our own bodies
so we are unable to cure our own minds ,
if the trouble is a complicated one
involving careful and patient treatment .
One of the greatest steps forward that has been
made this century is the way in which illness
of the mind is no longer feared or shunned ,
and is in fact no differently regarded than
physical illness . There is , nevertheless , a
great deal of tiredness which comes from
no major complication but results from an
inability to deal with life , especially under
the diverse pattern which is the twentieth
century .
In the days when most people were born ,
lived and died within the boundaries of
the village , it was not difficult for anybody
to live a day at a time . Even those who
held a high and responsible office lived in
far greater simplicity than their successors .
When news from the Continent took days ,
from America weeks , from the Far East ,
months , even a Prime Minister could go to
sleep in blissful ignorance of what might
be happening at the other end of England ,
individual has become so complex
years ago , men lived and worked
piece . Now a man may live twenty ,
work . The only connexion is the
pipeline of the railway on which they
travel day by day .
In many cases , their homes know little of
their place of work and their associates at
the office or works wonder what they
are possibly like in the surroundings of their
homes . It is easy , desperately easy , to lead
a ' double ' life without ever deliberately
planning to do so or in fact being conscious
of what is going on . It is easier to live life in
compartments but over the years it builds up ,
and to do so inevitably builds up tensions which
need to be handled correctly .
Can we then frame some ' rules ' which may enable us to live life
as fully as possible , without having our energy sapped by un-
necessary weariness . ( a ) Order makes for a decrease in tiredness .
We have a saying ' My head will never save my feet ' . Time
after time we forget something and have to go back
upstairs or down to the shops .
If we ever stopped to consider how much energy - and time -
we lose this way in the course of a day we would be
staggered . Some of it is inevitable , and we do not want to
become too pernickety . Nevertheless , we could all probably
be a little more orderly for we so frequently just muddle
through .
The housewife would find life far less tiring
if she made a list , followed a routine of work
rather than getting from one thing to the next .
The business man would find that he reached
the end of the day with far less strain if
he was a little more systematic . To drift
aimlessly along is more wearying than any-
thing else . If we would only sit down and
write out all the necessary jobs waiting to
be done and then work quietly through them ,
There may be some who will argue that
routine destroys the soul . It is so easy ,
they say , to get into a rut . Save us
from the school curriculum and even
worse the school system whereby for
meals everybody knows beforehand
exactly what , on any given day of the
week , they are going to have . If - such
a critic may say - you are calling
us to adventure , do not strangle us before
we start by putting us into a strait-jacket
I am more than conscious of this . How anybody
can go through the same routine day in and day
out for forty years I find difficult to understand .
A lot of it is inevitable so that industry and
commerce may be kept going - though if ever
it becomes possible to work out a system
of ' staggered ' hours it may do an immense
amount of good over and above relieving
the pressure on over-crowded trains .
As it is , with so much of our life already
in a predetermined groove , I would
hardly like to add further to the dullness
which it engenders . But I am not arguing
for this . I know how much of a drag it can be
and I was interested some little while
ago to hear of a school who tried a six-
day timetable .
They only worked , of course , a five-
3 p.m. .
It was a little complicated to work ,
of course , and there had to be a big
notice in the entrance saying which
it added immensely to the interest
and kept everybody on their toes .
To have order does not mean getting
who does not always want to do
I would not want to either , but if she wants to get through
the day without becoming exhausted , she will be well advised to
sit down quietly and make a list of everything she has got to
do , note the order in which they can most conveniently be
done ( or must be done because of other predetermined factors
- you must , for example , do your shopping on the morning of
the early closing day ) .
She will , in fact , be surprised at what peace
of mind ensues . ( b ) Concentrate on one
thing at a time . A list or a plan enables us to
put all our energies into the particular
matter on hand .
( Actually , the Mishnah quotes two further proof
texts and the Gemara explains why these ,
too , are necessary , but a careful examination
of that passage makes it clear that these are
not quoted here because they are not
necessary to prove the point made by
R. Joshua b. Levi . ) Finally , we note that
the comment of Rami bar Rabh is quoted
elsewhere .
From the above it follows that here , once again ,
we have a good illustration of how a
sugya has been fashioned from material
already in the hands of the Redactors .
The sugya is built around the saying of
R. Joshua b. Levi . The proof text for the
reading of the Book of Esther is quoted
with the comment given by Samuel .
( This is probably to be understood as a well-
known comment on the verse ; quoted by
Samuel in support of his thesis and quoted
by the Gemara in support of R. Joshua b.
the divine Name is taken from the Mishnah .
There is no reference to the Mishnah here
because the Mishnah deals with the
Name and the Gemara here quotes the
texts to support the thesis of R. Joshua b. Levi .
The question and answer with regard to the
need for the text of the angel are quoted
here in the same words in which they are
quoted in the discussion on the Mishnah .
This can either mean that both sugyas are
quoting a well-known question and
answer or that our sugya is quoting from
the longer sugya which deals with all
four texts quoted in the Mishnah .
Or it is possible that our sugya contains the
original question and answer and this is quoted
in the other sugya . ( This can be supported by the
use of the expression : ' Boaz did it of his own
accord but there was no approval of his action
in Heaven ' in both sugyoth . Such an
expression appears to have been framed in
response to the particular point at issue here ,
whether the Heavenly Court concurred
in the decision of the human court . )
The proof text of bringing the tithe to the Temple
is then quoted and the interpretation of the
latter part of the verse by Rami bar Rabh
is added , not because this is at all relevant
to the discussion but because it was
a familiar interpretation which had
become so well known that it was
invariably quoted whenever the verse
itself was quoted , almost as if it were a
part of the verse .
The Gemara continues with a saying of the
Palestinian teacher , R. Eleazar ( 3rd Cent. ) :
' The Holy Spirit manifested itself in three places :
the court of Shem , the court of Samuel of Ramah ,
and the court of Solomon . ' The place of this
saying here is obvious , it follows naturally
on the saying of R. Joshua b. Levi which
deals with a similar theme .
We know from the diaries of Samuel Pepys
that he was a great man for lace - paying
as much as 3 for a lace collar . But this
didn't mean he was prepared to do as much
for his lady , for he records testily : ' My wife
and I fell out about my not being willing
to have her gown laced . '
We read , with sympathy , an advertisement in the
reign of Charles 2 stating : ' Lost : a lawn 1hand-
kercher with a broad hem laced round with
fine Point lace about four fingers broad ' and
among the effects left by Nell Gwyn is an
unpaid bill for ' scarlet satin shoes with
silver lace ' . The records of these tender trifles
are very touching but then lace does place
upon everything a delicate sentiment .
Lucky indeed are the families that
possess a heritage of lace . A lace
bridal veil handed down from mother
to daughters , a lace-trimmed Christening
robe that each generation wears in turn -
these are proud possessions , linked to the
exquisite lace-making of the past .
But lace-making is by no means a lost
art . It suffered a decline and fell into
lamentably low standards in the fussy
over-furnishing of the Victorian age
but it would take more than a temporary
lapse in good taste to destroy this lovely ,
viable craft . It has , in fact , readily
adapted itself to modern tastes and the ill-
how completely it is in sympathy with con-
temporary surroundings .
It will be seen how , with bold design
and rich colour , knitting , crochet and
tatting in fine and medium-weight cottons
can give striking individuality to many things
in the home . Chairbacks , cushions , tablecloths ,
to mention only three - how satisfying it is
to avoid the ready-made in these and by
one's own handiwork produce something
that reflects true creative talent .
The more delicate patterns and finer
threads may be reserved to bring a light
and lovely touch to personal possessions -
a lace border to a handkerchief , fine-lace
insertion on a petticoat or blouse , a tatted edge
to a collar ; these add a charming , feminine
distinction that nothing else can give .
Although we assess lace-making as one of
the feminine skills , a number of the well-loved
traditional patterns that we follow today were ,
in fact , the brain-children of inventive men .
For in the old order of things , men designed
and worked lace as well as women and
special schools were set up to teach lace-
making not only to young girls , but to little
boys as well . Whole families made their
livelihood by lace-making and consequently
a folklore of song , festival and courtship grew
up around the lace industry .
During the sixteenth century a considerable
amount of crochet was produced in the
convents of Europe . Without doubt it was the
nuns who carried the craft to Ireland . There it
was developed into quite an elaborate and distinctive
form with rosettes , leaves and lace fillings . During
the time of Victoria this gentle craft was
greatly abused .
One can remember with horror the pictures of the
overcrowded and over-embellished drawing-rooms
complete with heavy crochet antimacassars , mantel-
piece covers with a fringing of clumsy bobbles and
numerous other crocheted pieces . It was some years
after the Victorian period that designers realised
the potentialities of the craft , and crochet was
revived with designs suitable for contemporary
trends . Crochet today has a variety of uses , and
has even stepped into the field of high fashion .
In some of the elegant boutiques of Paris
hand-crocheted blouses , gossamer fine in
texture , are sold at a very high price . With a
little time and concentration the woman at home can
produce fashion articles as elegant as those of
Paris - a blouse , delicate gloves or a fine
edging for collar , cuffs or a handkerchief .
In the home , crochet lace can be used to make
tablecloths , traycloths and runners , and edgings
from heavy to fine can fulfil a variety of
functions . The art of crochet is not difficult and
it is reasonably quick to work . In the following
pages simple diagrams and instructions are given
to enable the beginner to master all the essential
crochet stitches .
First launder crochet and then pin to the required
shape , ensuring that all lines of the crochet are
accurate . Place crochet in correct position on linen and
secure with pins . Run a line of basting stitches
on the linen following the outline of the crochet edges
which are to be attached to the linen . Remove crochet .
Two methods can be used to join the crochet to the linen :
( a ) Button Stitch round the outline of basting stitches ,
the knotted part of the button stitch lying on the
outside edge . Oversew crochet to button stitch .
( b ) Turn under a small hem , with fold lying on line
this hem , with 3 dc at each corner .
Oversew crochet to the dc. A household word ,
Coats Mercer-Crochet possesses qualities which
are of the utmost importance to the worker .
It washes beautifully , never loses its colour
nor becomes ' stringy ' , is very elastic and
preserves the beauty of the design . It is easy
to work with , soft , glossy and of uniform
thickness - it is the ideal crochet thread .
Remember that texture plays an important part in
the beauty of crochet . The finer mercerised threads
are more effective for the delicate designs used for
tablecloths , doilies , edgings and accessories , while
the heavier threads are used for bedspreads ,
chairbacks , luncheon mats , etc. Crochet hooks
are made of steel , composition or bone . Steel
crochet hooks range in size from number 3/0 ,
the largest , to number 8 , the smallest .
Each size of hook is made for use with a certain
size of thread . To ensure the correct results ,
it is important that you use the size of hook
specified in the directions . These are the
correct numbers to use with Mercer-Crochet :
Directions are given for a small practice
piece for each stitch that you learn . When
you have become proficient in these
stitches , attractive articles can be made
from the directions included in this book .
1 . Grasp thread near end between thumb
and forefinger . 2 . Make a loop by
lapping long thread over short thread .
3 . Hold loop in place between thumb
and forefinger ( Fig. 1 ) . 1 . Take hold
of broad bar of hook as you would a
pencil . Bring middle finger forward to
rest near tip of hook .
2 . Insert hook through loop and under long
thread . Catch long end of thread ( Fig. 2 ) .
Draw loop through . 3 . Do not remove hook
from thread . Pull short end and ball thread
in opposite directions to bring loop close around
the end of the hook , but not too tight
( Fig. 3 ) . Loop thread round little finger ,
across palm and behind forefinger ( Fig. 4 ) .
A great deal of modern furniture has tapered
legs , and in reproduction period pieces they
are frequently used . The simpler varieties are
extremely easy to work , the four sides being
simply planed to give the required taper . In
the more elaborate varieties , however , a toe is
worked in the solid , and this certainly
complicates the operation .
For short ones a smoothing plane can be used .
The gauge can now be used to nick in the tapers
on the newly planed surfaces , and these treated
as before . It is unnecessary to mark the taper with
the straight-edge as one relies upon the truth
of the plane sole to make the tapered surfaces
straight .
A glance at the gauge marks at the bottom
end reveals when the required amount
has been removed , and if care is taken
pencil line at the top , the work will be
accurate . The straight-edge can be used
to test the straightness of the sides .
Note that squared lines marking
the top member of the toe are
needed as well as the upper ex-
tent of the taper , and in
mark in the line of the taper
with pencil and straight-edge
as at ( B ) , Fig. 3 . A saw cut is
made at the upper toe line
no farther .
But why woodwork in particular ? Well , there
are many reasons . Wood is in good and
common supply ; it lends itself to making
innumerable useful household items -
furniture , fitments , garden items , toys , etc. ;
it enables results to be obtained fairly
quickly ; it is less expensive than most
other materials ; it is a pleasant material
to work with ; and , although it does
create a certain amount of mess , it is
all clean and easily cleared away .
This last point is certainly important because almost
are not only an economic necessity , but that a
were available .
Coming now to the actual tools and their cost , we begin
with what we have called a bare minimum kit . Probably
most men have some of the tools already . It will enable
a man to make simple , straight-forward things , and in
any case may be regarded as a good beginning to
which other tools can be added as the need arises . The
nature of the work will probably dictate the additions
to be made , but as a guide we have given a fuller kit
which increases the range of things that can be
made enormously .
As a still further development , we follow
with a good basic kit , which includes
the fuller kit ( which in its turn , of course ,
includes the bare minimum kit ) .
With this the vast majority of jobs
can be done , though for advanced
cabinet work the necessity for
certain special tools will become
obvious .
Lastly , we suggest certain power tools and
machines , the choice of which will
depend partly upon the space available
in the workshop , the amount one
is prepared to pay , and the type of
work a man normally does . First ,
however , a word of advice generally .
Do not buy so-called cheap tools or
machines . They never are cheap in the
long run . They may be inaccurate ,
Most tools have to lead an intensive life , and faults
in design or quality soon become apparent . It is far
better to pay the fair price for a tool of good
quality , and not handicap yourself from the start .
To put it in a slightly different way , do not allow
yourself to blame the tools when the job does
not turn out quite right !
Many men with only limited accommodation
have to do their woodwork on the kitchen table .
Providing this is sound , some perfectly good
work can be done on it , but the usual problems
are those of the vice , the bench stop , and storage
place for tools . The combined bench top and
tool cupboard shown here has been specially
designed and made for WOODWORKER
HERE is a project that will be welcomed by the
family man or father-to-be . Unlike many
commercial articles , this chair is solidly built and
capable of withstanding the heavy handling of the
most destructive youngster . Almost any available
timber can be used but Parana pine is
recommended , being cheap , easy to work , and
taking a good finish .
Start by making the two side frames from 1 in. by 1 1/4 in. planed
timber as shown in Fig. 1 . Although the timber will have already
been machine planed , remember to go over each piece with
a smoothing plane , otherwise the marks left by the cutters
will show up after painting . The dimensions given enable the
feeding tray to slide over a 30 in. table , but the height
can be altered if required .
All the joints are simple halving joints glued and pinned ,
which should nevertheless be cut with care to ensure a neat
appearance . The side frames are joined by four cross pieces
each 1 1/4 in. by 1/2 in. by 14 in. which fit into the recesses ( C ) ,
cut to fit them .
See Fig. 2 . These are then glued and
pinned into place . A similar piece of 1 in.
by 1 1/4 in. by 14 in. timber is fixed across
the end of the feeding tray as seen in
Fig. 3 which also shows how a piece of
hardboard is covered with plastic material
the frame with panel pins to complete
the feeding tray .
Cut this piece of hardboard so that it
fits up against the front legs of the
chair . The seat rests across the upper two
cross pieces and is made of 1/2 in. plywood
being taken directly from the work . Fig. 4
shows the framework for the back which
is made from 1 1/4 in. by 1/2 in. timber .
The amount of the backward tilt and
also the height is left to personal choice
and the width is best taken directly
Fix the piece A to the sides first
B temporarily in place on the chair
frame .
Decide on the required angle of slope ,
keeping B flat on the chair seat , and mark
off the exact position of B on the side
pieces . These can then be cut at the correct
angle and B is glued and nailed in place .
A piece of hardboard is then cut and pinned
to the frame and its edges planed off
flush .
Finally attach the back firmly to the sides with
screws driven from the inside . The footrest is a
piece of timber 14 in. long and about 1/2 in.
by 4 in. attached to the front legs with a pair
of angle irons as shown in Fig. 5 . When determining
the position of the footrest , do not place too near
the seat to allow for the growth of baby's legs .
To complete the job , screw two fittings to the
inside of the chair arms about 2 1/2 in. from the
back to hold the baby's safety harness . These can be
made by shaping and soldering two pieces of stout
wire as shown in Fig. 6 . Make sure that these
are well secured as they will have to withstand
considerable pulling as the child becomes older .
Punch in all nail and panel pin heads and fill the holes
with plastic wood . Then thoroughly glasspaper the whole
framework and round off any sharp edges ( such as the
edge of the seat , feeding tray , etc ) . Fill the grain with a
woodfiller in the usual way and paint the frame in
a suitable pastel shade , using a contrasting colour
for the seat and the back which can be decorated with
a suitable nursery transfer .
Avoid using lead-based paint as this could prove poisonous
if junior decides to bite the chair . Finally , it is as well
to cover the footrest with rubber or any such protective
material that might be available as otherwise the
paint would soon be scratched off .
( J.H.P. ) BUILDING your own boat is a most
satisfying and worthwhile project .
Here are the plans of a very seaworthy little
rowing dinghy many of which I have built and
sold . It is especially designed for simplicity in
construction , cheapness and lightness of weight ,
and measures approximately 8 ft. by 4 ft. She
weighs only 60 lb. but can carry three people
and an outboard motor with a comfortable
margin of freeboard .
For instance , in Canada we use galvanised nails
in place of screws . We just bend them over and clamp
firmly by using a hammer on each side . Over here I 've
always used brass screws , which are more expensive . The first
but to save money any scrap may be used , and if this
is nailed and glued together strongly , it may be marked
and cut to shape later .
If you do not have a wooden floor on which to anchor
the moulds , make a frame of rough lumber as shown in
Fig. 2 . The main idea is to have the moulds standing as
rigid as possible , for it is on these you will be building
and shaping your little craft , upside-down . For cheapness
I recommend using Douglas Fir Plywood from British
Columbia .
This is hot pressed and resin bonded to ensure
a permanently water proof glue line . Be sure to
shilling .
I have also included a sketch of paddles I make for
rowing this dinghy ( Fig. 3 ) . They are very simple , cheap
and easy to make . As will be seen from the plan
there is only a single gunwale on the outside .
I find that the type of rowlock we use in Canada
this in another way as shown in Fig. 4 .
Cut the moulds and the
transoms to shape as in the
a wooden floor you can use
' A ' frames fastened to the floor
if not , use a strong horizontal
frame that will sit firmly on
the ground or concrete floor . I
use a heavy old base as in
Fig. 2 .
The edges of the transoms should be bevelled to
correspond to the sides and bottom of the boat .
Don't forget to cut out on each side of each mould
to allow for the chines to rest in these
notches , as they are not fastened to the
moulds , which will only be used whilst
the hull is under construction .
The chine is the long stringer on each side which
is joined to both transoms and lies in the grooves
cut in the moulds . Each chine is made of oak ,
ash , spruce or any long grained flexible wood . I
prefer spruce when available . As will be seen
in the plan , the transoms have a frame 1 in. by 1 in.
on each side .
The chines are morticed into this and butt up
against the transom . Start at the bow and
spring them both at the same time over the
slots cut in the moulds and into the notches
cut for this purpose in the stern or after
transom framing . Glue , screw and make fast .
The skeleton of the boat will now take shape ,
and this is the time to check before making fast
to see that nothing is distorted . Ensure that
the outside measurements from transom to transom
are equal on each side and that the transoms
are parallel horizontally . Next bevel the chines
with a plane so that the bottom will fit snugly .
Cut out the bottom and sides accurately from the
plan measurements but leave sufficient margin for
planing after fixing to the boat . Use your two
lengths of 8 ft. by 4 ft. ply for this
purpose , the sides from one , and the bottom from
the other . If care is taken not to waste the
ply , plenty of material is left over for the thwarts .
Having trimmed up the chines , we are now ready
to plank the sides . Start again at the bows ,
clamping into position with a ' D ' clamp . Bend
round the frame to the stern and clamp there . If
you have a third clamp use it in the centre as
well . After generously covering with glue , screw
the sides to the transom framing and the chine .
Use 5/8 by No. 4 gauge screws ( brass ) or nail
with inch and a quarter galvanized nails , if
you are doing it that way . Use flat head screws
about 4 in. apart and do not counter-sink in
the screw to allow for a good grip . Remember
Clean up with the plane ready for the bottom ,
trifle ; this can be cleaned up later . As you are
screwing and gluing this piece to the chines it is
necessary to be careful not to miss the chine with
the screws . I prefer spacing screws 3 in. apart for
the bottom , both for screwing to the chines and
Again , don't forget to glue . Now put on the keel and
the rubbing strakes and you are ready to lift the boat off
the moulds . You won't want them again for this boat , so
shift them right out of the way . Place the boat right side
working .
Fix on the gunwales and insert the thwarts ( seats )
taking care to reinforce the sides of the dinghy at the seats
with vertical members as shown in the plans . Make the
four blocks for the rowlocks and mark their positions
before riveting on the gunwales so that you do not put
a rivet where you will have to cut out the inside ( gunwale )
one to fit the block .
I rivet my gunwales together through the side of the hull
with copper nails and roves . It greatly improves the
appearance and the strength . Paint with good marine primer ,
undercoat and at least one coat of finishing paint .
WHEN an assortment of differently coloured materials are cut
into a variety of shapes they can be combined by either
making fabric pictures or designs .
While these may ultimately be made into a picture
for framing and hanging on a wall , they may
also be arranged into a design , and the
resulting panel utilized for decorating a useful
article .
This could hardly happen without the
herring having some orientation with the
sea bottom . It means that the crowding
is caused during the daytime , and that
the herring must continue to migrate over
the ground as well as in midwater and
during the swim ( the swim at East Anglia
is always from the north ) .
movements , although primarily
instinctive perhaps , and certainly
are also closely related to the sea-bed
a deep-water channel to the Dogger where
the herring spawn along the northern
The effect of bottom congestion due to
the light pressure is inevitably mixed
with that of the suitability of ground
for spawning . Both result in crowding ,
so there is no need to try to separate
them - thank Heaven ! A good picture of
this is seen on the 150 miles of spawning
grounds from the Viking in the north down
to the Klondykes and the Reef along
the western edge of the Norwegian
Deep .
In this 200-fathom trench the herring do not touch the bottom .
Their descent stops at the end of the light pressure . But
they migrate easterly to the Norwegian side , or westerly , until
in the shallower water the mile wide layers disappear from the
echo-sounders . Bottom crowding comes when they cannot reach
their optimum depth ; and this coincides with the suitable
gravelly soil of these many roughs where the spring-
spawning herring are always found .
The joint evidence of echo-sounders
The details are harder still to see .
other banks are most of them
going to travel a hundred
miles farther south before they
spawn . Some will spawn at the
So the arrival of any particular shoal
fish at a certain spawning ground may
be accidental . Yet there will always be some
that find it if enough are travelling , just as
the robin who gets back exactly may be
only one among thousands who do not .
But this southerly migration is not
the drift , it probably has a survival value
in ensuring that the fry after hatching
are drifted back into the normal home
are biased to east or west by the
are well known to bring good
and Suffolk beaches .
recent years have shown . A succession
of winds is needed for this effect of
often start off the " local " herring ;
there is an easterly drift special
to this rump of coastline , caused by
Herring fishermen call this " the outset " . It
is strongest at spring tides , when without
wind you will " set " out - or drift to the east-
ward , the length of half a fleet of nets -
almost a mile on every tide at the Smith's
Knoll . Without an explanation of how it
works , it may well be that this outset , akin
to the mouth of a great salmon river , has
been the biggest factor through the ages
in the constancy of this great herring fishery .
The East Anglian behaviour ( see p. 82 )
has always differed from that of the
summer fisheries . There is the " swim "
at slack waters , even in daylight
sometimes ; and the high swimming ,
when fish are caught only in the top
few yards of netting . These and other
fascinating behaviour mysteries are peculiar
to this fishery , which unfortunately seems
to be dying out ; but a full discussion of
them is beyond the present scope .
The Bow-wave Theory . This assumes
that all fishing gear , when moving ,
sends before it a kind of scaring effect ,
probably through waves or vibrations in
the water or along the ground .
Underwater films suggest that the
footrope of a trawl does this . Films
have also shown plaice moving before
a seine net in just the same way after
being gathered inwards by the ropes .
( Just how the seine ropes do this is not yet proved ; it may
be by actual contact , or by sight reaction to the disturbed
sand ; or even in the case of flat fish , by vibrations
through or along the bottom . ) But given such a bow
wave of disturbance , it is obvious that without something
to overcome its effect , very few fish would be caught .
Let us consider first what would
appear to be the simplest case -
that of flat fish on the bottom .
The evidence suggest that the fish are
Then they stop swimming and are caught . In
the seine-net film this usually seemed to
happen just after the fish had risen above
the footrope , and presumably out of its
field of disturbance , or bow wave . This suggests
that the wave might be transmitted by the
sea-bed , though the footrope in this case
was actually just off the bottom and was
indeed passing over some fish .
Actually the seine net has little or no cover .
And in this film the rise of the fish was
small , a matter of a foot or two . With round
find safety on the bottom , this cover
would seem to be even more essential ;
but more films are needed to prove this .
Cover in the fast-moving trawl is considered
essential to catch round fish whose
WE have not yet reached the stage in Britain
when 50 planes are engaged in spreading 1,500 tons
of DDT and fuel oil over 3 million acres or when
20 million acres are sprayed with dieldrin . An eye-
witness described one sprayed area as literally rank with
the stench of small game and birds dead from insecti-
cide poisoning .
does the balance of nature by killing both pests
and predators , is viewed with concern by a
number of American State Research Stations . Not
content with issuing bulletins on the dangers
of the misuse of chemicals in agriculture ,
some stations are carrying out useful research on
pest control by biological means . Both native and
imported predatory insects and insect pathogens
are used in field trial tests .
The biological control of pests in the garden
is not new to the American gardener . Lady-
birds figure in press advertisements , their
sale being by the gallon . Praying mantis ( Mantis
religiosa ) , both native and " immigrant " varieties ,
are used by gardeners in all parts of the United
States . Advertisements offer eggs of European ,
Chinese or native forms of mantis .
From the day it hatches in the spring
until it dies in the late autumn , the
praying mantis satisfies its voracity by
eating other insects . Nine blowflies
may be consumed at one sitting and
the fully adult , 2 1/2-in.-long insect ,
is able to keep a firm hold on one
grasshopper while eating another .
According to Dr. Max Beier in " Fang-
heuschrecken " ( Die Neue Brehm Bu"ckerei ,
1952 ) , the praying mantis is trecking
northwards .
Meanwhile Mr. Moncrieff had sent me an
egg-case of the Chinese mantis . The
first mantis had hatched from the very large
egg-case on June 6 . Both the Chinese
and Spanish mantis , in the young stage
at any rate , are light brown in colour .
Because of the cool , wet weather , I had great
difficulty in breeding fruit flies and , after
many of the mantis of both types had died
in my Kilner jars , I poured living mantis
over vines and peachtrees .
A Gardeners Chronicle reader living in
Grantham , Lincs , kindly offered to
cooperate with me in studying praying
mantis as a pest control in the cold
greenhouse . Of the dozen Spanish mantis
sent him by post on June 22 , only two or
three survived the journey ; one thrived
and the latest report I have is that
this mantis is still alive .
DESPITE the steady influx of substitutes
since the end of the war , clay pots are
still in greatest demand . It is mostly
in the smaller sizes that the substitutes
have made headway , and although
numerous small clay pots are used each
year , they are fewer than they were 10
years ago . In the larger sizes there is still
no real substitute for clay that can be
obtained at a comparable price , except the
bituminized paper pots which are used on
commercial nurseries for growing tomatoes
The main disadvantage of the clay pot is its
brittle nature ; even with reasonably careful
handling , the annual losses are often around
10 per cent. , and where the handling and
storage facilities are not too good , these
losses will be even greater . This does not
necessarily apply to the larger sizes , as
they are not quite so fragile as the
smaller ones and are not normally thrown
about in quite the same way .
The storage problem puts clay pots at a
definite disadvantage . They are fairly heavy
and difficult things to accommodate and
they must have some protection from severe
weather , which can be quite a headache in
a small garden . While admitting that
broken pots have on occasions provided
artists with delightful studies , there is no
doubt that a pile of badly stacked ,
half-broken pots is an unlovely sight
from any point of view .
Every garden boy will agree that having to
wash clay pots is a definite factor in
favour of their abolition ; in fact one
young man was so wholehearted about this
a few years ago that he made the headlines
for having smashed a large number # to
relieve his feelings . On the small-to-medium
establishment , it is a disagreeable chore
which nobody tackles with any enthusiasm ,
whereas on larger establishments the pots
can be sterilized or washed by machine .
It is not easy to make an economic
comparison between clay pots and the various
substitutes ; the former may last indefinitely
with luck , while the latter are often
expendable used only once . Clay pots are
efficient and congenial containers in which
to grow plants . In their proper setting they
are not unattractive and , in spite of
their shortcomings , most gardeners have
a nostalgic affection for them .
Present-day pots are better finished , do
not get dirty so readily and are easier to
wash . The deep rims make for neater and
safer stacking , though they are still
expensive and still get broken . On the
other hand , there is really no replacement
for the larger sizes , so they have the
decided advantage of being the only
suitable container available in quantity
for fairly large plants .
Soil blocks are probably the oldest alternative to clay
pots for plant raising . These are compressed blocks of
compost , made in a specially devised press to
simulate roughly the shape and size of a pot .
Usually cylindrical or hexagonal in shape , they
are made of the same compost as would have
been used in a pot , the # only difference being
that it is used in a slightly moister
condition .
Seed is sown , or seedlings are pricked out into them
in the normal way , the only real difference
being that more of the watering is done through a
rose to avoid breaking the blocks with a spout
of water . First-class plants of tomatoes ,
cucumbers , marrows , melons , cauliflowers ,
celery and onions , may all be raised in soil
blocks ; so can such flowering plants as
dahlias , chrysanthemums , salvias , sweet peas ,
lupins and numerous others .
One big advantage of soil blocks is an obvious
one : the cost of a pot of any description is saved
completely . Manufacturing the block and planting
it is very little more trouble than normal potting ,
and a superior plant , which transplants more
easily , is produced . The obvious limitation #
is that soil blocks can only be used for
propagating ; there can be no progression to a
larger block when the plant or seedling is ready
to be moved ; it must be planted out or
potted .
Many amateur gardeners might improve their
results by buying a small hand-operated soil
block maker and use the money saved on
buying small pots to improve their composts .
The various types of small paper pots are very
useful for short-term operations , but are
inclined to collapse if the plants are in them
too long .
They are # quite useful for plants that are
despatched to market or direct to customers ,
their cheapness making them attractive to the
nurseryman ; there is also considerable saving
in carriage costs because of their lightness .
There are many types of plastic pots available ;
some expensive , some quite cheap ; some good
and others not so good . A wide range of
plants grow quite well in plastic pots and
usually need less water than those in clay
pots .
They are slightly more difficult to
manage , however , until a little experience
are usually more expensive than clay ones ,
but they are almost indestructible and
will last a long time with normal care .
The job of the teacher is to set the learner's
vocabulary to work on the existing store
so as to make it grow . He does not
simply pack new things into the store .
The solitary learner has to find out
how to do this for himself , with the help
of books . He uses his vocabulary to
ask questions and uses the books to
find the answers .
Thus learning how to learn means becoming
your own philosopher , your own psychologist
and your own teacher . You will then be
a well-established learner and the world
will be at your feet . Although the word
" mind " has given rise to endless
controversy among philosophers and psycho-
logists , many of whom would like to
abolish it from the dictionary , most
of us obstinately go on using it .
" mind " vanishes , at any rate for some time . It seems very difficult
to detach the mind from the brain , and all the biological ,
surgical and pharmacological evidence points to a very
close connection . There is a lot to be said for keeping the
essence of a man which is supposed to persist apart from
the body , and to reserve the more prosaic word " mind " for
the basis of all those experiences and phenomena which
are clearly associated with the brain .
Can we now put forward any reasonably clear
picture of this " basis " of mental phenomena ?
The physicists have succeeded remarkably well ,
gases and so on . Where has psychology got to in its
of mind akin to the atoms of matter ?
At one time it was thought that mind could indeed
be analysed into discrete bits . These bits were
identified as elementary sensations . These were
thought to combine together to form compound
experiences by analogy with the way atoms of
matter combine to form molecular compounds .
But this view led to too many difficulties and
was finally abandoned . Nevertheless the search
for basic units of mind has gone on and will
doubtless continue , for it is the aim of science to
discover ultimate units .
We must beware , however , of supposing that there must be any
in physics might lead us to suppose that the ultimate
we can only indicate what seems to be the most promising
It is not an easy concept and if I try to make it
concrete it will be at the cost of over-simplification
It is the tendency to get things
psychologist I am constantly
in friends and acquaintances .
mistaken belief that the
This is what I mean by " getting things the wrong way
round " . He is far more likely to find out about how
his own mind works by looking at other people's .
For although looking inwards ( or " introspecting "
as it is called ) , is not entirely ruled out ,
nowadays most psychologists would agree that it is
one of the most unreliable methods of getting
any precise information .
And so they prefer objective methods . Since they cannot
directly look into the mental processes of another
person they observe his visible behaviour and then try
to give theoretical interpretations of what lies behind
this behaviour . This is no more queer than the method
of the doctor who observes signs , and records symptoms ,
and diagnoses the inner states responsible for them .
He may never have had the disease himself but he
can nevertheless identify it . Similarly the psychologist has
to be prepared to observe and make inferences about
all kinds of processes in other people , whether or not they
correspond with anything in his own experience . We know
very little about the patterns of brain-activity which
provide our schemas , nor do we need to know as far as
psychology is concerned - these patterns are the concern of
the neuro-physiologists .
The numerically largest group , consisting of male
weekly wage-earners up to chargehand level
and in the works only , excluding the offices , was
therefore selected . A detailed age-structure was
compiled from personnel department records ,
revealing that there were ( at that time ) seven-
teen men seventy years of age or older ,
thirty-three aged sixty-four years , and sixty-
five just fifty years of age .
A small panel was formed , not on a formally representative
basis but rather of energetic and concerned individuals ,
from various levels in the firm . In due course
the panel decided to seek further insight into the
problems faced by older workers , and approached
those seventy years of age or older .
fourth year , and opportunity has been taken
to revise the course in the light of
experience . Topics for the six weekly meetings
of one-and-a-half hours ( each held half in
company time , half in the man's time ) are
now as follows : 1 . Personal adjustment 2 . Health
3 . Work and leisure 4 . Living arrangements
5 . Financial planning 6 . Final discussion
The weekend conference for the men and their wives ,
which takes place at company expense in a country or
resort hotel , includes an address on ' The Woman's Point
of View ' and one on ' Making the Most of Health ' . Separate
discussions are arranged for the wives in addition to the
plenary sessions . Of the men reaching fifty years of age
since the scheme started , 125 ( 37.2 per cent ) have
taken part .
The original scheme was planned to provide short re-
fresher courses at the ages of fifty-five and sixty :
the first of these is due in 1963 . Meanwhile , each
' graduate ' is encouraged to seek help and advice in
working out his ideas , either through the company's
personnel department or by an approach to
members of the panel responsible for the scheme .
The latter do not regard themselves as expert
advisers , but are prepared to seek out the
appropriate sources of information or advice .
Workers' Educational Association , submitted
Hood , a copy of his report on an enquiry
older workers and the effects of retirement
Hugentobler Roger
The Lord Provost , having studied the report on ' The Morale and
Health of Retired Workers ' , and being satisfied that the matters
raised were of considerable importance to the citizens of
Glasgow and warranted further study , set an informal
committee representative of bodies particularly concerned with
the welfare of older people to examine the report and
its implications and to consider the advisability of
arranging a Conference on Preparation for and
Occupational Activities on Retirement .
The large attendance and atmosphere of
this Conference , held in October , 1957 ,
reflected not only an increasing awareness
of the problems of men and women nearing
or already in retirement but also a strong
desire on the part of all concerned for
concerted action towards preparing men
and women for life in retirement and more
adequate provision of facilities for
crafts , hobbies and leisure-time interests
for those who are retired .
As a result , the Glasgow Retirement Council came
into being in April , 1958 , with Dr. Andrew Hood as
chairman and Mr. Andrew Atkinson as secretary . The
Council has active committees on Education and
Preparation for Retirement , and on Occupational
Centres . The former consists of representatives from
the Glasgow Corporation Further Education Department ;
the Workers' Educational Association ; the University
Extra-Mural Education Committee and departments
of psychology , education and social science ; ... .
In 1959 it was suggested by Mr. T. M. Banks , Assistant Director
of Education for Glasgow , that industrial firms might be ready
to let older employees attend day-release courses on preparation
for retirement , their wages paid for the time thus spent . An
approach was made to about twenty large firms and in Oc-
tober , 1959 , the first experimental day-release course for
men was organised . Eleven students from seven firms atten-
ded a course on six full Fridays and it was made clear both
to the men and their employers that the venture was an
experiment from which the organisers hoped to learn as much
as the participants .
1 . Are there differences in adjustment to ageing
and retirement according to the occupational
levels are the better or the poorer prepared
for successful adjustment to retirement and
in what aspects ? 3 . Does the evidence
obtained support a rationale for adapting
a pre-retirement planning and preparation
programme to the needs of older employees
of different occupational levels ?
Each time you rehearse you will probably put
things in a different way . All the better ! - it will
sound much more spontaneous on the occasion
itself . Remember your four names - have the list
with you if you like - and you simply can't
be flummoxed ! Of course , in any speech a good
start and a good finish are half the battle .
So - see the next page ! Yes , they are waiting for you .
But there is no need to be frightened . The audience
will eat out of your hand - if they like what
you offer them . A good start will put them in a
good humour . Ladies and gentlemen ! I 'm afraid
I have not had much experience of public speaking .
But that 's a terrible way to begin ! Why tell them you
are a novice ? It 's their interest you want - not their
sympathy . And you want to get it from the word
GO ! Try something like this : It is said that tele-
vision keeps people at home . But you , at any
rate , have proved that wrong . And they say , too ,
that television makes its appeal to those of lesser
intelligence .
May I suggest that you have proved that
right ! Congratulations ! And away you go into
Thank you for listening to me so patiently . A political
candidate often used that finish . No wonder he
didn't get in ! Instead he might have ended
this way : Well , those are my views .
When he learned what was causing the commotion he
became greatly alarmed , and after the body had been
taken to St Thomas's Hospital it was his
Camp , aged thirty-three , the girl who was to have
been his bride . There was little doubt of how
had been murder .
She had been struck several times with a blunt
instrument , and her head was smashed in .
There were signs of a violent struggle , blood
on the cushions and floor , and the remains
of her broken umbrella . But a pair of bone
cuff-links found in the compartment seemed
to provide the only possible clue to the killer .
The body was examined , and it was definitely
It seemed probable that the motive had been
robbery , and this was further confirmed when a
check was made with the woman's relations in
Good Intent , a public-house in Walworth . Her day
one of whom lived at Hammersmith and the
Elizabeth had left Hammersmith in the late afternoon ,
and arrived at Hounslow around 5 P.M. , where
she had tea with her other sister , and then
went to catch the 7.42 . Her sister saw her
But both purse and ticket , and the packages , were gone when the body
was found at Waterloo . Neither the sisters nor Mr Berry thought it
likely that she had been carrying much money . A porter at Hounslow
supported the sister's statement that Elizabeth Camp had been alone in her
compartment when the train left , but this did not help much , since it
had made stops at nine stations before Waterloo .
The police began a systematic search of the line -
no easy task , but one in which patience and method
paid off . At a spot on the embankment between
Putney and Wandsworth they found a bloodstained
pestle such as chemists use , with some hairs
sticking to it . The murder weapon , more than likely ,
and perhaps evidence enough to have brought a
killer to book in modern times .
But in 1897 , alas ! there was no fingerprint bureau ,
no experts to check and photograph any ' dabs ' it
tackle , and Superintendent Robinson , of the L.S.W.R.
Police , and Chief Inspector Marshall , of Scotland
accepting the likelihood that Miss Camp had been
attacked for the sake of robbery , they did not
of her former men friends and acquaintances began .
They also had to cope with the usual flood of rumours , so-
me well meant , some mischievous , including one that a
man had been seen fleeing from Vauxhall station on
the Thursday evening , with blood actually dripping from
his hands . The inquest was opened on February 17 , but ,
beyond the jury hearing a formal identification of
the victim and inspecting at Waterloo the carriage
in which she had died , there was nothing on
which to proceed , and the inquest was
adjourned .
Day by day the police followed up likely and even unlikely
trails . It was learned that Elizabeth Camp had been lending
money to her relatives , and her brother-in-law was asked for
a detailed account of his movements on the 11th . The dead
woman had been engaged once before - to a barman
named Brown .
This man agreed that his engagement had
been broken off after one particular
tiff , but denied that he owed Miss Camp any
money . All the while the police were casting about
for a man who had been seen leaving the train
at Wandsworth . A passenger described this individual
as a man of about thirty , of medium height , with
a dark moustache , and wearing a frockcoat
and a top-hat .
The porter at the station bore out this
description , but the man was not traced .
Perhaps the news of their search got around ,
for a man did obligingly present himself
at Wandsworth police-station , claiming to have
committed the murder - but he was mentally
defective , and , despite his claim to infamy ,
had been nowhere near the 7.42 that evening .
Even the bone cuff-links found beside the body , which
had at first been considered as belonging to the killer ,
proved yet another red herring , for it was learned that
they had been borrowed by Elizabeth Camp from one
of her sisters . A young man from Reading named Marshall
had an uncomfortable time in the presence of the coroner .
This man was known to have left his home on February 11 , and
to have been away for four days . Not in itself a crime , but , added to
the knowledge that he had gone shopping in the town of Guil-
dford for a false moustache , it left him with something to
explain . His story was that he had left home to try to
join the Army ( presumably feeling that a moustache might enhance
his military bearing ) , and this was accepted .
And so the inquest , which had dragged on , with
adjournments , until April 7 , finally had to be content to return
a verdict of " wilful murder against some person or
persons unknown . " The most vital clue of the Wedgwood
pestle had been of no assistance . The killer must
have been very thankful that the science of
dactyloscopy was only in its beginnings .
The next female fatality occurred eight years later ,
yet so strange were the circumstances that it was
a further seven years before even a ghost of a
solution emerged . There has always been something
sinister in the idea of tunnels . The building of
them was one of the most dangerous jobs con-
nected with railway construction ; and there
were many people who believed that to travel
through tunnels would be an equally
hazardous business .
Some thought that the result would be all
sorts of horrible illnesses brought on by the
confined atmosphere . " The shareholders who travel
by it will be so heartily sick , what with the
foul air , smoke and sulphur , that the mention
of a railway will be worse than Ipecacuanha , "
wrote an anti-railway industrialist when it was
proposed to build the Box Tunnel .
The mere thought of subterranean travel
gave others a feeling of danger . A medical journal
said , " the deafening peal of thunder , the sudden
immersion in gloom , and the clash of reverberated
sounds in a confined space combine to produce a
momentary shudder , or idea of destruction , a thrill
of annihilation . " It was also prophesied that
passengers would be robbed and assaulted in the
darkness .
For all that , as far as England is concerned ,
there have been only two occasions on
which a body has been found in a tunnel
in circumstances pointing to murder .
The first was that of Mr Gold , in the famous
Lefroy case , and by an odd chance the second tragedy
occurred on the same line , although this time the
victim was a woman .
Though in the minds of most people there was
no doubt that the woman had been the victim
of foul play , the verdict brought in was that there
was not sufficient evidence to show whether
she had fallen or been thrown from a train .
The Merstham Tunnel , on the London-to-
Brighton line , is approximately one mile long ,
and some time before midnight on September
24 , 1905 , a Sunday , Sub-Inspector Peacock , of
the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway ,
It was the battered and broken body of a woman .
He sent word straight away to near-by Merstham
Station , and a stretcher party took the body to
the Feathers Hotel to await identification .
Was it a case of suicide , where some unhappy soul
had walked deliberately into the blackness and
likely , since , when she was examined by a local
was found to have her own silk scarf drawn
thrust in her mouth like a gag .
Both her wrists bore the marks of severe bruising ,
and there were other injuries on her body which had
occurred before her death was ensured by some
train which had roared through the tunnel . There were
no letters or papers found on her to assist identi
fication , no money , and no railway ticket . By then
reports were being gathered about all traffic over
this stretch of line , but no information was
forthcoming about any carriage with an open
door , nor any passenger reporting an incident
which might relate .
So the body of this small girl with the blue eyes and
long brown hair in a bun at the back of her head
remained a mystery until later the following day .
During that time a description of the girl was
circulated , and a Mr Robert Money came forward to
identify her as his sister , Mary Money , aged twenty-two .
The girl , who was described as being " always bright and
jolly , " had been unmarried , and lived at Lavender Hill ,
Clapham , on the premises of a dairyman , Bridger , for
whom she worked as a book-keeper .
On the Sunday , the day of her death , she had gone out in the
evening at about seven o'clock , telling her room-mate , Emma
Hone , that she was going for a walk , but would not be
gone for long . According to Miss Hone , she had not been
carrying a handbag , but she believed she had had a small
purse .
At Clapham Junction a ticket-collector
was able to identify a photograph of the
girl , and he said he had last seen her
on platform six waiting to board
a train for the short run to Victoria .
A passenger at Victoria said he had seen
a young lady " as near as possible "
like the photograph shown him , with
a man " very close in conversation and
walking arm in arm . "
A guard reported that at East Croydon
he had seen what was accepted as the
same couple sitting close together in
a first-class compartment of the
train from London Bridge of which
he was in charge . The two could
have joined this train by taking
one from Victoria and changing
at East Croydon . He also believed
that they had still been together at
South Croydon , and he remembered
Medical evidence established that Mary
Money had been dead for about an
hour before her body was discovered ,
and this matched reasonably well with
the timetable of the train in question .
More important evidence came from a
signalman at Purley Oaks , who had
seen , as the train passed his box , a
couple struggling in a first-class
compartment ; but he seemed to have
been used to seeing couples engaged in
told us that there was nothing an En-
glishman would not do ; nothing an Ame-
rican would not say ; nothing an
Italian would not sing ; no music
to which the Frenchman would not
dance ; nothing the German would
not covet ; and nothing the Chinese
would not eat .
SOME years ago a contemporary philosopher
told us that there was nothing an Englishman
would not do ; nothing an American would not
say ; nothing an Italian would not sing ; no
nothing the German would not covet ; and
nothing the Chinese would not eat .
It is not our purpose to discuss this dictum .
the progress of civilisation which allows a dish
many centuries ago , in some cave or hilly
meat or fish burnt and roasted in the
How many centuries later did the mercenary in
the Roman wars thus impale on pike or lance his
later still the young Victorian buck adventuring
persisted down the ages , the motive that preserved
them has always been the same . Apart from the need
for nourishment , the instinct of hospitality has
always been strong in mankind . The sharing of
a meal in those earliest dangerous days was an
admittance into an acquaintanceship far more
important than the casual meetings of the present
day ; the desire to share something more intimate
than mere converse has always been there .
The truth is that good food offers a
programme of entertainment almost
unlimited in its variety and its presen-
tation affords an opportunity of
showing a guest something of ourselves .
It is a far enough cry from the primitive
meal-times of a simpler world to the
banquets of later days , when the table
groaned under its load of complicated
dishes , and for all the blossoming of the
arts around them the diners were little
There was always the spice of an orgy
in those Roman feasts , for instance , with
all their peacocks and nightingales'
tongues ; unreasonable surfeit , too , in the
elaborate fashion of eating brought
out of Italy into France , we are told ,
by Catherine de Medici . The peasant in
those days , as ever , ate sparingly , but
generously enough in his own fashion ,
save at feast times , when he , too , let
himself go ; and it was from his simpler
Epicures and gourmands , sated by the unending
procession of dishes from those mammoth kitchens
of the 18th century - that amazing epoch of
grossness and delicacy - sought inspiration at last from
the dishes of the country , and , instead of gorging the
eye with magnitude , began to understand the value of
intelligent selection and comparative simplicity , though
nowadays their simplified meals would seem quite
monstrous .
Epicures and gourmands , sated by the
unending procession of dishes from those
mammoth kitchens of the 18th century -
that amazing epoch of grossness and
delicacy - sought inspiration at last from
the dishes of the country , and , instead
of gorging the eye with magnitude ,
began to understand the value of
intelligent selection and comparative
simplicity , though nowadays their
simplified meals would seem quite
Does one , however , know who first thought of boiling
water and food ? The ancient Britons , I believe , used to
make water hot by dropping a red-hot poker into it ,
because their pots would not stand fire ; but Jacob
must have had one that would , because Esau sold
his birthright to him for a mess of pottage - and
then we hear of the fleshpots of Egypt after
which the Israelites sighed .
Does one , however , know who first thought
of boiling water and food ? The ancient
Britons , I believe , used to make water hot
by dropping a red-hot poker into it ,
because their pots would not stand fire ;
but Jacob must have had one that
to him for a mess of pottage - and then
we hear of the fleshpots of Egypt
after which the Israelites sighed .
Anyhow , Homer does not seem to have known any
way of cooking meat except by roasting and boiling .
When Achilles gave a royal feast the principal dish
was a grill , which he cooked himself , and he knew
how to do it , too : - When the languid flames at
length subside , He throws a bed of glowing
embers wide ; Above the coals the smoking
fragment turns , And sprinkles sacred salt from
lifted urns
Anyhow , Homer does not seem to have
known any way of cooking meat
except by roasting and boiling . When
Achilles gave a royal feast the principal
and he knew how to do it , too : - When the
throws a bed of glowing embers wide ;
Above the coals the smoking fragment
turns , And sprinkles sacred salt
from lifted urns .
When , however , the Greeks did learn the art of making
fireproof earthenware from the Egyptians , their cookery
made rapid progress , because they were men of taste
and intellect . A remarkable peculiarity in the banquets
of the ancient world was the fact that they did not
confine the resources of the table to the gratification
of one sense alone . Having exhausted their invention
in the preparation of stimulants for the palate ,
they broke fresh ground and called another sense
to their aid .
When , however , the Greeks did learn the
art of making fireproof earthenware from
the Egyptians , their cookery made rapid
progress , because they were men of taste
and intellect . A remarkable peculiarity in
the banquets of the ancient world was the
of the table to the gratification of one
in the preparation of stimulants for the
another sense to their aid .
By delicate application of odours and richly-distilled
perfumes , these refined voluptuaries aroused the
fainting appetite and added a more exquisite and
ethereal enjoyment to the grosser pleasures of the
board . The gratification of the sense of smelling
was a subject of no little importance to the Romans .
They considered flowers as forming a very essential
article in their festal preparations ; and it is the
opinion of Bassius that at their desserts the
number of flowers far exceeded the number
of fruits .
distilled perfumes , these refined voluptuaries
fication of the sense of smelling was a
They considered flowers as forming a very
and it is the opinion of Bassius that
at their desserts the number of flowers
far exceeded the number of fruits .
When Nero supped in # his Golden House ,
essences fell upon him ; and one of the
recreations of Heliogabalus was to
smother his courtiers with flowers . Nor was
ancients made use of flowers ; they were
considered to possess sanative and
medicinal qualities .
According to Pliny , and others , certain herbs
and flowers proved of sovereign power
clarifying the functions of the brain . It
is said that there is nothing new under
the sun , but regarding foodstuffs the
measure of novelty .
According to Pliny , and others , certain
herbs and flowers proved of sovereign
power in preventing the approaches of
ebriety , or , as Bassius less clearly
expresses it , in clarifying the functions
of the brain . It is said that there is
nothing new under the sun , but regarding
foodstuffs the traveller occasionally
encounters a certain measure of novelty .
In China , for instance , dried rats are esteemed
a delicacy . The visitor is told that
alive , dipped in treacle and swallowed
like a prairie oyster is considered a
piece of resistance .
In China , for instance , dried rats are
esteemed a delicacy . The visitor is told
that they restore the hair of the bald
and that a stewed black rat will ward
off a fever . A number of newly-born
and swallowed like a prairie oyster is
considered a piece of resistance .
Among the natives of Northern Australia lizards
roasted on the point of a spear are
and the Chinese . The Celestials , apart
from eating it fresh , squash it , press
it and dry it , in which form , dusted
of it in almost any provision shop .
Among the natives of Northern Australia lizards
roasted on the point of a spear are definitely
a delicacy while Mediterranean peoples have a
high opinion of the octopus as an article of diet .
So have the Japanese and the Chinese . The
Celestials , apart from eating it fresh , squash
it , press it and dry it , in which form , dusted
over with flour , you will find a stack of it
in almost any provision shop .
Foodlore reflects much more of national temperament
than is customarily imagined as well as entering human
activities to a greater extent than is usually assumed .
We naturally cannot overlook that Magyar cookery owes
one of its most classic features to the Turkish rule under
which the Hungarians groaned for nearly 200 years .
If that country had not been for so long a battlefield red
with the blood shed to defend Christian civilisation ,
Hungary would have been deprived of the condiment which
provides many Magyar dishes with a vivid and brilliant
The Austrian cuisine embraces the delectable 6Wiener
Schnitzel as well as dishes and stews heightened with
aromatics where the paprika insinuates its perfidious
fire , aerian creams , ingenious pastries and a
crescent-shaped breakfast roll created by a pastry cook to
celebrate the victory against the Turks in 1683 . Spanish
cookery is reminiscent of bull-fights , of Spanish dancing
and of Goja : it is vivid , highly coloured , sometimes
Quixotic and withal it has a sombre ardour , with
streaks of poetry , meat disguised under heavy and vehement
The Czechoslovak kitchen , again , is
so languorous , so passionate , and
the meats with their antithesis . The
of rich embroideries and costumes
specifically national . The art and
science of cookery , however , is
The French have an inborn appreciation
of good food and the gusto which they
derive from gastronomy is intellectual
and aesthetic as well as physical .
There is the same finesse about their
feeding , the same subtle delicacy of
touch , the same unfailing sense of
proportion as exists among her
writers , music composers and other
exponents of things that are
typically French .
placing his food in his mouth and gulping it down as
he talked . Brigham Young would make a dinner on tripe
which he washed down with beer . A writer who had dinner
with Dickens says the menu was Whitstable oysters , a brown
sole , a baked leg of mutton with oyster & veal stuffing and a
gin punch .
The French have an inborn appreciation of good food and
the gusto which they derive from gastronomy is intellectual
and aesthetic as well as physical . There is the same finesse
about their feeding , the same subtle delicacy of touch ,
the same unfailing sense of proportion as exists among
her writers , music composers and other exponents of
things that are typically French .
among ourselves and it is prepared at
household . Thackeray , of course ,
waxed enthusiastic about Bouilla-
a noble dish is , A sort of soup , or
The " pot-au-feu " is as much a national institution
in France as is tea drinking among ourselves and it is
prepared at least once a week in every bourgeois
household . Thackeray , of course , waxed enthusiastic
about Bouillabaisse and sang - This Bouillabaisse a
noble dish is , A sort of soup , or broth , or brew ,
A hotch-potch of all sorts of fishes That Greenwich
never could outdo ; Green herbs , red peppers , mussels ,
saffron , Soles , onions , garlic , roach and dace .
A fascinating study also opens up in
had a great contempt for animal
food , believing that it impaired the
intellectual faculties . Bunyan's break-
fast and supper consisted of a
piece of coarse bread and a
bowl of milk .
welcomed by men of genius as well as the foods for
which they have had an aversion . Shelley , for example ,
had a great contempt for animal food , believing that
it # impaired the intellectual faculties . Bunyan's
breakfast and supper consisted of a piece of coarse bread
and a bowl of milk .
Dante Gabriel Rossetti had simple tastes
been blind to the charms of turbot and
turned it over on the table cloth to
examine the marks on the back
without going through the formality
of having his turbot removed first .
Dante Gabriel Rossetti had simple tastes in food . At one
dinner he is said to have been blind to the charms of
turbot and to have been much more interested in the
dish in which it was served . He turned # it over
on the table cloth to examine the marks on the back
without going through the formality of having his turbot
removed first .
THE SAME MAN WENT TO SEE CARLYLE , AND ,
AFTER MENTIONING THAT HE HAD DINED WITH
LONGFELLOW TOLD THE SAGE A VERY
FUNNY STORY WHICH MADE CARLYLE
ABSOLUTELY LAUGH ; BUT ALL THE
CHELSEA PHILOSOPHER DID IN RETURN
WAS TO ASK IF HIS GUEST WOULD
HAVE A CUP OF TEA !
that he had dined with Longfellow told the sage a
but all the Chelsea philosopher did in return was to
ask if his guest would have a cup of tea !
A Scottish knight - Sir John Mercer - was
imprisoned in England . His son , in revenge , was
harrying English shipping as far away as Cherbourg ,
and doing it to some purpose . John Philpot ,
one of that new class of merchant financiers
which the city of London was now producing , fitted ,
equipped and manned a fleet from his own
resources , and captured the young Mercer in a
brilliant Channel fight .
It was naturally a highly popular victory with the
Londoners , but it brought heavy censure from nobles
who still believed that they had a monopoly of
leadership . But , at last , Gaunt sailed . Opposing
him was the French Admiral , Jean de Vienne -
a great sailor and an able strategist .
Obedient to the policy of his King , de Vienne avoided
trouble at sea as cleverly as Du Guesclin avoided it
on land . Gaunt was compelled to give up his search for
an elusive foe , and , afraid to return home without
something to show , he foolishly attempted to besiege
the well-protected fortress of St Malo . This
involved the dreary method of mining operations in
which Gaunt , under the Black Prince , had shown
considerable skill at the siege of Limoges .
fame and glory . Gaunt was compelled to return
even despised failure . The ' ribald ' Londoners , who
comparing the failure of a subsidized duke
citizen .
These dreary years of ineffective fighting provide
obvious morals for those who are judges long
after the event . It seems obvious that , though
the longbows of yeomen could pierce the
battle was no substitute for a sound policy ,
became mere marauding route marches .
It seems obvious that if an expedition to
BUT NONE OF THESE DEDUCTIONS WERE
DRAWN AT THE TIME , BECAUSE LARGE-
SCALE WAR REQUIRED MONEY , AND
THE CITIZENS WHO HAD THE MONEY
WERE NOT YET SUFFICIENTLY AT
ONE WITH NOBLES AND KING TO THINK
THEIR MONEY WELL SPENT IN FIN-
ANCING A RULING CLASS WHICH
DESPISED THEM . THE COMMONS WERE
GLAD ENOUGH TO ENJOY THE FRUITS
In this cruel process which was
hammering out nations on the anvils of
war , there was a constant stirring of
those in authority to find some simple
way out of the complicated financial
6impasse which always resulted , and in the
story of the experiments and expedients
to which the Exchequer resorted is
the story of the prelude to the
Peasants' Revolt of 1381 .
In appreciating this story , modern con-
ceptions of governmental duties must be
set aside . A modern government needs
taxation not merely for defence and
offence but for a very wide range of
social services . A mediaeval oligarchy
needed taxation in order to supplement
the private wealth of the monarchy
( the royal income from the revenues of
crown lands , the fees of feudalism
Social service as a function of government
was quite alien to mediaeval thought - its
substitute was the mutual self-help of
communities , whether those communities were
monasteries , manors , townships , or wards and
guilds of a city . A mediaeval tax was
therefore in essence a forced payment whose
return was the uncertain bounty of booty
and the vague advantages of military glory ;
it was therefore always granted grudgingly
and coupled with the vain hope that , in the
When ' his ' war did not bring victory and
booty , a new group of Lords might oust
the unsuccessful leaders , and the Commons ,
who usually supplied the hard cash , might
be bold enough to demand the production of
accounts , and even at times the impeachment of
the unsuccessful . But the Commons were not
the people , and even a full Parliament was
not yet a true mirror of the nation .
The people - Langland's ' folk ' and Gaunt's
' knaves ' - were villeins still tied to the
feudal obligations of work or villeins who
had bought their release , free labourers
who worked for the highest bidders , free
yeomen who had prospered enough to become
successful farmers , the artisans , craftsmen ,
journeymen and small tradesmen of the
towns , and the retainers and men-at-arms
in the pay of landed Lords .
None of these classes , except the yeomen , paid or
expected to pay direct taxes . During the four-
teenth century , the traditional methods of
financing the Exchequer had become stabilized .
nal funds , they were usually granted an
export tax on the wool trade , collected by
prices , quality and tax could be efficiently su-
pervised and controlled , together with a
There were two other sources of public revenue -
first , the Church , which wisely followed the lead
of the Commons and in its own Convocations
granted equivalent contributions , and second ,
the foreign merchants , with whom the King's
at ' colloquies of merchants ' , and whose
payments were now authorized by parliamentary
sanction at a rate roughly fifty per cent in
excess of the rate for native merchants .
In addition to these revenues , the King had the
financial benefits of his position at the head
of the feudal system , as its chief landowner
and the recipient of the fines of royal justice .
It was , therefore , a complicated and not very
satisfactory financial system in which the
borders between private and public purse were
as ill-defined as the borders between private
and national war , and in which the comparati-
vely simple obligations of the feudal pyramid
But this time there was a very interesting
attempt to apply a sliding scale to the
payments demanded . The definition of an
adult was altered to read ' over sixteen ' ,
and , where the poorest were to pay a groat ,
the Duke of Lancaster and the Archbishops
of Canterbury and York were to pay ten marks ,
and between these two extremes a graduated
scale of payments was fixed for the
different classes of laymen and clerics .
Again the resentment was widespread and
the results disappointing - a tax estimated
to yield 50,000 in fact raised only 27,000 .
In the following year , 1380 , the last and
most notorious third poll-tax was agreed
by a Parliament which met at Northampton .
There were dark reasons for a meeting so
far away from the capital in a town with
poor communications and not over supplied
with hostelries and lodgings .
London was again in turmoil ; but this time
over a question of trade rivalry . A rich mer-
chant from Genoa had been murdered , and
John de Kyrkby , a Londoner , was one of
those charged with the crime . It is clear
from the chronicles that this was a sordid
quarrel between monopolists and interlopers .
The city merchants were jealous of foreign
merchants who could tempt court and
baronage with rarer luxuries than those
A sum of 160,000 was demanded - a staggering figure
to mediaeval eyes . It was determined that 100,000
was a fairer target , and the Parliament agreed to find
two-thirds of this sum providing the clergy supplied
the remainder . The method of assessment to which the
Trebling the rate was arrived at by a simple
arithmetic which argued that , as the first
poll-tax had supplied 22,000 , a tax of
three times the rate would produce 66,000 .
The only concession made in view of the
objections to the first two poll-taxes was
the suggestion that the rich should help
because no machinery was provided for
carrying it into effect , and a subordinate
In Chapter Two he gauged the nature of the heart's movements
from the dissection of living animals , showing how these move-
ments alternate with rests and are seen best in cold animals
or in flagging warmer ones . At the time of its movement
the heart becomes generally constricted , its walls thicken ,
its ventricles decrease in volume and it expels its
content of blood , appearing paler in so doing in animals
such as serpents , frogs , and the like .
At one and the same time , therefore , occur the beat
of the apex , the thickening of the heart walls , and
the forcible expulsion of their contained blood by the
contraction of the ventricles . Going on in Chapter Three
to the movement of the arteries , likewise gauged from
the dissections of living animals , Harvey noted that
contraction of the heart and the apex beat occur in
systole , simultaneously with dilatation of the arteries
and of the artery-like vein , and expulsion of the
ventricular content .
Arterial pulsation disappears with cessation of
ventricular contraction . During cutting or puncture of
the ventricles , there is often forcible expulsion
of blood from the wound . Arterial diastole is
thus synchronous with cardiac systole but ,
when movement of blood through arteries is
hindered by compression , infarction or inter-
ception , the more distal arteries pulsate
less because their pulse is nothing other
than the impulse of the blood entering them .
' And while the heart is slowly dying ,
one can sometimes see it - so to speak
- rouse itself and , in reply to two or
three auricular beats , produce a single
ventricular one slowly and
reluctantly and with an effort . '
Sentence Database
Yet in spite of the fact that his ideas did his
business no good George would never conceal them .
He was a socialist and believed in the right
of the working class to control their own destiny , and
said so . Being a craftsman and a skilled man ,
George won many prizes , and though some people
would have nothing to do with him , others
would , and the comrades helped in many
ways .
When eventually the ovens were fixed at the new shop , the tremen-
dously hard work was if anything intensified . George used to
mix 100 stone of bread in 12 hours , and Kate served in the
shop , which was open from 8 o'clock in the morning to
12 o'clock at night . At that time pastries and buns
were sold at 32 pieces for one shilling .
( In this strike , as reported in the Sheffield
men were out a fortnight , disciplined and solid ,
cent made sacrifices for their fellow men ;
living wage and showed the worth of the
common man . )
Soon they were good enough to sing at meetings .
One of the helpful by-products was that
they were able to obtain some respectable
clothing , with which they wore a white tie
and Red Flag badge , thus presenting a much
evening , when George went to speak at Malin Bridge ,
they would be there to begin the meeting .
As they became known the Choir went to working-
sing to the miners , and sang for other organisations such
as the Bakers' Union , for whom they went on Satur-
day evenings to the Corner Pin Hotel , to rally
the members . The B.S.P. also rented pleasant rooms
school was held .
He christened the babies . Also , when
with the Bible , which he had
only book they were allowed ,
Although his ideas were diametrically opposed
to those of parsons he got on wonderfully well
with them , particularly those who , like the Rev.
Conrad Noel , the eloquent leader of
the Church Socialist League , genuinely advocated
socialism . With such men , who had the
courage of their convictions and their
Christianity , common ground could be found .
There was no abatement in political
work . The British Socialist Party endea-
voured to get more socialist members sent to the
Council , and to Parliament , being deter-
mined and obdurate in their attitude that
their candidate must go forward in the
elections . In the Sheffield Trades and Labour
Council meeting on October 16 , 1912 , George
had said , ' Mr. Barton would go to the poll .
Just as the Labour Party had fought the
This new party , the British Socialist Party , was
not prepared to accept the role of junior helper
in the Labour movement , or of only providing
propaganda in order to increase the volume of
socialist thought in the city , but sought to create
in the Labour movement a more militant attitude
people .
Alf Barton , who in 1911 was presented
with a book on the life of Marx ,
and a gold purse in recognition of his
work for the movement , was later
known to say that it was not ne-
cessary to understand Marxism in order to
understand socialism , though at this time
he was a keen member of the B.S.P. .
Dr. Davidson said he would go for
a walk over the fields while we attended
to our business . To my amusement ,
when we met at tea at the rectory
after the Dedication , the Archbishop
said he had been stopped by
a farmer in a field . He seemed
rather indignant , but we took the
episode without a smile till afterwards .
The Hall proved most useful , especially in winter
a table with cross and candles , and the people
appreciated the Church Hall for worship as well
was translated to Winchester , and Dr. Hubert
Burge became Bishop of Southwark .
Meanwhile I had been asked to do a bit of Diocesan
work in connection with Higher Religious Education , and
to become the Southwark Secretary of the Church Reading
Union . This meant organizing lectures and courses of
religious instruction through the Diocese , and I
also found myself a member of the Diocesan
Conference , where I remember introducing myself as
the incumbent of the highest church in the
Diocese .
There was a somewhat shocked atmosphere in
some quarters , until I explained that my church
work was growing pretty heavy , and we managed
among the children and young people .
It was while I was at Tatsfield that I first visited Oberammergau
in Bavaria to witness the Passion Play . The place and its people were
to play an important part in my life . For five years in succession till
war broke out in 1914 , I spent my summer holidays there and became
very intimate with the people and the environs . Every year between the
Passion Plays , an interval of ten years , another play would be
performed at the small theatre in the village , when new talent would
be discovered and trained .
Germany for ten years , by which time in
1924 I was in a different parish in Surrey .
Towards the end of my five and a half years'
incumbency I was asked if I would start
a village choral society and conduct it .
This opened up a new interest , and we plunged
into it .
any idea of reading music . This was the village doctor who was an
old school friend at Clifton . He could sustain the tenor part quite well
and lead the others . As for basses and altos the conductor had to
teach by singing the parts with them . It was very amusing , and by
the end of a few months an enthusiastic choir of men and women
could render simple part-singing tolerably well .
Wedding Feast . ' Enthusiasm grew , and in a few more months we
gave a concert at which the accompanist was the village schoolmaster ,
and the tenor solo ' Onaway awake ' was sung by the Rector .
Friends from Limpsfield , in addition to the villagers , came up ,
and we were all happy .
IN 1913 Dr. Burge , Bishop of Southwark , asked me to go as
Vicar of St. Mark's , Woodcote , Purley , a new church built
by the well-known architect Mr. George Fellowes Prynne ,
who was to become a very intimate friend , and I was
later on joint executor of his estate with his
solicitor cousin . As Bishop Talbot had told me that I
ought not to spend many years in Tatsfield , we held
great family consultations .
My eldest brother was then living in Limpsfield with
his family , and found a very suitable house nearby
where my mother settled , and eventually died in 1926
at the age of 92 . Dr. Burge was not able to be present
at the Institution and Induction Service in St. Mark's .
This was taken by the Suffragan Bishop of Woolwich ,
Dr. John Leake , who lived at Blackheath , and was
a close friend of ours .
But what a change from the dear little old church
at Tatsfield to the great modern church of St. Mark's
at Purley . One felt at Tatsfield that , small as the
church was , it had its own atmosphere , and for centuries
had been a House of Prayer . I could not but feel the
chilliness of the new church , beautiful as it was and is .
When we had found a group of people who gladly
co-operated , we made the little side chapel a place
of daily prayer .
I suggested to the congregation that it needed
warming up by constant prayer and worship , and we
found many to help . Gifts of candlesticks and
stained-glass lancet windows - finally a new altar -
helped to furnish the chapel as a little sanctuary
for prayer and quiet . In time we received similar
gifts for the High Altar , and large East and West
windows .
It was very interesting to have the privilege of filling
such a beautiful building with suitable fittings ; I made
a rule that all gifts should be submitted for approval to
to put beautiful things into a beautiful church
and yet spoil the building with ornaments unsui-
table to the environs .
We also had a little Mission Hall leading off
the Brighton Road , in a street full of small houses .
This was called Ellen Avenue when I first went
there , but was soon changed into the better-
sounding name of Lansdowne Road . There
were lots of children there , and we had
a flourishing Sunday School and an evening
service . I soon saw that the parish needed
more help both at the church and Mission
district .
The Church Army Captain had done very good work in the
Lansdowne Road district , but I needed more help in the
church for the full rota of services on Sundays and weekdays .
Most fortunately I was able to engage the Rev. E. U. Evitt in
1913 soon after I had come , and he organized the Mission
district and got to know , and be known by , many of
the people of the parish .
A great blow disturbed all our efforts in the following
year , 1914 , when war broke out . Very soon Chaplains for
the Forces were urgently needed , and I felt clearly
that one of us must volunteer . The Bishop , Dr. Burge , did
not wish me to go then , as I had barely been in the parish
for a year . Mr. Evitt , however , was much less committed
than his Vicar , and he was accepted at once and
was very soon in France where he did splendid
work until his health broke down and he had a bad
attack of enteric fever .
Meanwhile in Purley there was much activity and much
co-operation especially with the other Christian communities .
At a large public meeting we launched the project known as the
I found myself deeply involved . At first , the main work was to help
wives and relations of the soldiers to get their ' Separation '
allowances , but soon , alas ! , as casualties began and increased
in the winter of 1914 and 1915 the matter of War Pensions
became very urgent , and I was asked to be Chairman
of the Committee in Coulsdon and Purley .
Indeed , for the next seventeen years , during my time at
Purley , and from 1922 at Surbiton , I was continuously
Chairman of the local War Pensions Committee . This
task involved a very great deal of detailed work for
the Committee . We had a splendid body of local residents ,
and a series of excellent Honorary Secretaries . Our
Committee met once a week in the evenings , and
included professional men from every walk of
life .
Very soon we managed to get a hut in Purley where soldiers
were very welcome and the ladies organized a canteen . Life was
in those years more than busy . We now had a vicarage next
to the church , and I was most fortunate in having for eight
years a most able and devoted housekeeper whom I had known
well in Limpsfield where she had a house next to the
church .
On hearing that I was to leave Tatsfield and come to
Purley she offered to come and look after me . She was
a real treasure , of yeoman stock and clever in all domestic
things , a widow who knew how to look after the ' boy , '
who was the only other occupant of the house when
Mr. Evitt had gone .
We gathered together a splendid Sunday
afternoon service at the church , each child
being given a number which , as they came into
church , they could just whisper to
the superintendent who filled in the regi-
ster at her own home . Each child had a
picture given them and the lesson was
largely based on this . It was on a
stamp which could be stuck in
their book , and there was quite a
clamour for back stamps if a child
had to miss the Sunday Church from any cause
It was quite amusing to see how much
the children enjoyed the service , and I heard
of parents or faithful nurses threaten any
naughty child with the penalty of not being
allowed to come to the Children's Church
on Sunday afternoon . I hope the threat
kept them good in the week , but anyway
they were a most delightful lot , and
it is a great joy to meet them now
fifty years afterwards when so many
are parents or even grandparents
me at once to chronicle a most intimate and
lasting friendship begun in 1913 in Purley and
continuing till old age to-day . When I went
to St. Mark's , the first contact I made was
with the Vicar's Warden , Mr. F. W. Charlton
sons was just coming into the world in this year
of 1913 .
From then till now the acquaintance ripened into a very
deep friendship which I have taken with me through
all the many vicissitudes of a long ministry . Mr. and
Mrs. Charlton have been from the first difficult
years of war , when most lives were upset and
some tempers were easily frayed , the most
loyal and devoted friends .
Their homes - for since those years they have
lived on in Purley - have always been
havens of rest , and the welcome has never
failed . Their three boys , now successful men ,
were in our Children's Church from the
outset , and when we don't see one
another we do not forget .
In those early years 1914-18 , life was very full
both in the parish and in the wider war activities .
The Bishop , knowing that I spent my holidays in
Bavaria , asked me if I would do something for two wards
at the Royal Herbert Hospital , full of war prisoners .
I was very glad to help in this way , and visited them
frequently , establishing at once a friendly contact with
the Bavarian wounded who were delighted to find
someone who knew their native villages .
I could at once notice the great antagonism
between the Bavarians and the Prussians who openly
scorned these more simple country folk .
Less than no response from the Russian side led
one to fear that the event might well have the
outcome that the Nazis evidently hoped might
lead to disaster . Then there had been much talk of
the setting up among the German population of a
general system of " francs-tireurs " , to be named
" Werewolves " .
The Nazi fortress concept turned out to be nothing
more than a fantasy . Thanks to the good
sense of the front line soldiers , the
meeting of East and West was marked by
the use of no weapon more lethal than
vodka . And the effect on the German people
of the first ten years of the promised
a spirit of warlike frenzy , had produced
universally a dull bewildered apathy .
So far had our thinking led us in this matter of the
" Werewolves " that we had contemplated the necessity of very
special precautions to guard the lives of our airmen . Particular
hatred , we felt , was bound to be aimed at the representatives of
those who had , over the years , spread such ghastly havoc , destruction
and death over Germany , causing such wholesale slaughter among
men , women and children , old and young alike .
By the end of the month he still delighted in
Naples . He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as
much as his health permitted him to enjoy any-
thing . ' The Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is arrived , which
is a great resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ;
# he is going out fast ... . What a gay , lively
people , and what a busy town . At Rome , every
other man was a priest : here the priest is
1superceded by the soldier - a favourable change
in my eye , particularly as the troops are very
fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted
in Naples . He told Cloncurry that he
enjoyed it as much as his health
he wrote , ' is arrived , which is a great
resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ; he
is going out fast ... . What a gay , lively
people , and what a busy town . At Rome ,
every other man was a priest : here the
priest is 1superceded by the soldier -
a favourable change in my eye ,
By the end of the month he still delighted in
Naples . He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as
much as his health permitted him to enjoy anything .
' The Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is arrived , which is a great
resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ; he is going
out fast ... . What a gay , lively people , and what
a busy town . At Rome , every other man was a
priest : here the priest is 1superceded by the
soldier - a favourable change in my eye , particularly
as the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples .
He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as his
health permitted him to enjoy anything . ' The Pearl ' , he
wrote , ' is arrived , which is a great resource . Vesuvius
seems to be tired ; he is going out fast ... . What a gay ,
lively people , and what a busy town . At Rome , every
other man was a priest : here the priest is 1superceded by
the soldier - a favourable change in my eye , particularly
as the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples . He
told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as his health permitted
him to enjoy anything . ' The Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is arrived , which is
a great resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ; he is going out
fast ... . What a gay , lively people , and what a busy town . At
Rome , every other man was a priest : here the priest is 1superceded
by the soldier - a favourable change in my eye , particularly as
the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples . He told
Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as his health
permitted him to enjoy anything . ' The Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is
arrived , which is a great resource . Vesuvius seems to be
tired ; he is going out fast ... . What a gay , lively people ,
and what a busy town . At Rome , every other man was
a priest : here the priest is 1superceded by the soldier - a
favourable change in my eye , particularly as the troops
are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples .
He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as
his health permitted him to enjoy anything . ' The
Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is arrived , which is a great
resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ; he is
going out fast ... . What a gay , lively people , and
what a busy town . At Rome , every other man
was a priest : here the priest is 1superceded by
the soldier - a favourable change in my eye ,
particularly as the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples .
He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as his
health permitted him to enjoy anything . ' The Pearl ' , he
wrote , ' is arrived , which is a great resource . Vesuvius
seems to be tired ; he is going out fast ... . What a gay ,
lively people , and what a busy town . At Rome , every other
man was a priest : here the priest is 1superceded by
the soldier - a favourable change in my eye , particularly
as the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in
Naples . He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed
it as much as his health permitted him to
which is a great resource . Vesuvius seems
to be tired ; he is going out fast ... . What
a gay , lively people , and what a busy town .
At Rome , every other man was a priest :
here the priest is 1superceded by the
soldier - a favourable change in my eye ,
particularly as the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in
Naples . He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as
much as his health permitted him to enjoy
anything . ' The Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is arrived , which
is a great resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ;
he is going out fast ... . What a gay , lively
people , and what a busy town . At Rome , every
other man was a priest : here the priest is
1superceded by the soldier - a favourable change
in my eye , particularly as the troops are
very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples . He
told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as his health
permitted him to enjoy anything . ' The Pearl ' , he wrote ,
' is arrived , which is a great resource . Vesuvius seems
to be tired ; he is going out fast ... . What a gay , lively
people , and what a busy town . At Rome , every other
man was a priest : here the priest is 1superceded by the
soldier - a favourable change in my eye , particularly as
the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in
Naples . He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as
much as his health permitted him to enjoy anything .
' The Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is arrived , which is a great
resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ; he is going
out fast ... . What a gay , lively people , and what a
busy town . At Rome , every other man was a
priest : here the priest is 1superceded by the
soldier - a favourable change in my eye ,
particularly as the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still
delighted in Naples . He told Cloncurry
that he enjoyed it as much as his
health permitted him to enjoy
anything . ' The Pearl ' , he wrote , ' is
arrived , which is a great resource .
Vesuvius seems to be tired ; he
is going out fast ... . What a gay ,
lively people , and what a busy
town . At Rome , every other
man was a priest : here the priest
By the end of the month he still delighted
in Naples . He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as
much as his health permitted him to enjoy any-
resource . Vesuvius seems to be tired ; he is going
a busy town . At Rome , every other man was
a priest : here the priest is 1superceded
by the soldier - a favourable change
in my eye , particularly as the
troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples . He
told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as his health
permitted him to enjoy anything . ' The Pearl ' , he wrote ,
' is arrived , which is a great resource . Vesuvius seems
to be tired ; he is going out fast ... . What a gay , lively
people , and what a busy town . At Rome , every other
man was a priest : here the priest is 1superceded by
the soldier - a favourable change in my eye ,
particularly as the troops are very fine . '
By the end of the month he still delighted in Naples .
He told Cloncurry that he enjoyed it as much as his
health permitted him to enjoy anything . ' The Pearl ' ,
he wrote , ' is arrived , which is a great resource . Vesuvius
seems to be tired ; he is going out fast ... . What a gay ,
lively people , and what a busy town . At Rome , every
other man was a priest : here the priest is 1superceded
by the soldier - a favourable change in my eye ,
particularly as the troops are very fine . '
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl
back to England , and returned to Rome for the
winter . In late November , he was ' suffering as
usual ' , but hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find
this place agree with me better than Naples .
The journey has been against me , as there has
been much rain and damp , but the temperature
is high & I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
Pearl back to England , and returned
to Rome for the winter . In late
November , he was ' suffering as usual ' ,
but hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find
this place agree with me better than
Naples . The journey has been against
me , as there has been much rain and
damp , but the temperature is high
& I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back
to England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In
late November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped ,
he told Arthur , ' to find this place agree with
me better than Naples . The journey has been
against me , as there has been much rain and damp ,
but the temperature is high & I have not
yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl
back to England , and returned to Rome for
the winter . In late November , he was ' suffering as
usual ' , but hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find this
place agree with me better than Naples . The journey
has been against me , as there has been much rain and
damp , but the temperature is high & I have not yet
thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back to
England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In late
November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped , he
told Arthur , ' to find this place agree with me better than
Naples . The journey has been against me , as there has
been much rain and damp , but the temperature is
high & I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back to
England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In late November , he
was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find this
place agree with me better than Naples . The journey has been against
me , as there has been much rain and damp , but the temperature
is high & I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back to
England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In late
November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped , he told
Arthur , ' to find this place agree with me better than Naples .
The journey has been against me , as there has been much
rain and damp , but the temperature is high & I have not
yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back to
England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In late
November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped , he
told Arthur , ' to find this place agree with me better
than Naples . The journey has been against me , as
there has been much rain and damp , but the
temperature is high & I have not yet thought of
a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back to
England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In late
November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped , he
told Arthur , ' to find this place agree with me better than
Naples . The journey has been against me , as there has
been much rain and damp , but the temperature is high
& I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl
back to England , and returned to Rome for
the winter . In late November , he was ' suffering
as usual ' , but hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find
this place agree with me better than Naples .
The journey has been against me , as there
has been much rain and damp , but the
temperature is high & I have not yet
thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl
back to England , and returned to Rome for the
# winter . In late November , he was ' suffering as
usual ' , but hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find this
place agree with me better than Naples . The
journey has been against me , as there has been
much rain and damp , but the temperature is high
& I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back to
England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In late
November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped , he told
Arthur , ' to find this place agree with me better than Naples .
The journey has been against me , as there has been much rain
and damp , but the temperature is high & I have not yet
thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl
back to England , and returned to Rome for the
winter . In late November , he was ' suffering as
usual ' , but hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find this
place agree with me better than Naples . The journey
has been against me , as there has been much
rain and damp , but the temperature is high
& I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past ,
he sent Pearl back to England ,
and returned to Rome for the
winter . In late November , he
was ' suffering as usual ' , but
hoped , he told Arthur , ' to find
this place agree with me better
than Naples . The journey has been
against me , as there has been
much rain and damp , but the
temperature is high & I have
When the sailing season was past , he
sent Pearl back to England , and returned
to Rome for the winter . In late November ,
he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped ,
he told Arthur , ' to find this place agree
with me better than Naples . The journey
has been against me , as there has been
much rain and damp , but the tempe-
rature is high & I have not yet
thought of a fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back to
England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In
late November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped ,
he told Arthur , ' to find this place agree with me
better than Naples . The journey has been against me ,
as there has been much rain and damp , but the
temperature is high & I have not yet thought of a
fire ... .
When the sailing season was past , he sent Pearl back
to England , and returned to Rome for the winter . In late
November , he was ' suffering as usual ' , but hoped , he told
Arthur , ' to find this place agree with me better than
Naples . The journey has been against me , as there has
been much rain and damp , but the temperature is high &
I have not yet thought of a fire ... .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I
have an Italian who is perhaps the best Valet
de Chambre that ever was . But he has not
one word of English . ' While he was writing
this letter he heard of the fall of the Whigs , and the
temporary assumption of the government by
the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens
that I have an Italian who is perhaps
the best Valet de Chambre that
ever was . But he has not one word
of English . ' While he was writing
this letter he heard of the fall of
the Whigs , and the temporary
assumption of the government by
the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have an
Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre that
ever was . But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he heard of the fall
of the Whigs , and the temporary assumption of
the government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life # truly ! ... It so happens that I have
an Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre that
ever was . But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he heard of the fall of
the Whigs , and the temporary assumption of the govern-
ment by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have an Italian
who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre that ever was .
But he has not one word of English . ' While he was
writing this letter he heard of the fall of the Whigs , and
the temporary assumption of the government by the
Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have an Italian
who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre that ever was . But he
has not one word of English . ' While he was writing this letter he
heard of the fall of the Whigs , and the temporary assumption
of the government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have an Italian
who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre that ever was . But
he has not one word of English . ' While he was writing this
letter he heard of the fall of the Whigs , and the temporary
assumption of the government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have
an Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre
that ever was . But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he heard of the fall
of the Whigs , and the temporary assumption of
the government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have
an Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre
that ever was . But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he heard of the fall
of the Whigs , and the temporary assumption of the
government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that
I have an Italian who is perhaps the best
Valet de Chambre that ever was . But he
writing this letter he heard of the fall of
the Whigs , and the temporary assumption of
the government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have
an Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de
Chambre that ever was . But he has not one word
of English . ' While he was writing this letter he
heard of the fall of the Whigs , and the temporary
assumption of the government by the Duke of
Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have an
Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre that
ever was . But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he heard of the fall of the
Whigs , and the temporary assumption of the government
by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that
I have an Italian who is perhaps the best
Valet de Chambre that ever was . But he has
not one word of English . ' While he was writing
this letter he heard of the fall of the Whigs , and
the temporary assumption of the government
by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that
I have an Italian who is perhaps the
best Valet de Chambre that ever was .
But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he
heard of the fall of the # Whigs ,
and the temporary assumption of the
government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens
that I have an Italian who is perhaps
the best Valet de Chambre that ever was .
But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he
heard of the fall of the Whigs , and
the temporary assumption of the govern-
ment by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have an
Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre
that ever was . But he has not one word of English . '
While he was writing this letter he heard of the fall
of the Whigs , and the temporary assumption of the
government by the Duke of Wellington .
A pleasant life truly ! ... It so happens that I have an
Italian who is perhaps the best Valet de Chambre that
ever was . But he has not one word of English . ' While
he was writing this letter he heard of the fall of the Whigs ,
and the temporary assumption of the government by the
Duke of Wellington .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble !
What infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but
I really tremble for my country ! I may be
mistaken , 1tho' I cannot but fear that the
exasperation of the People will be so great at the
return of Ultratoryism , that the Commons House
upon a dissolution , which must be had , will be
a mass of Radicalism , & then God knows
what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble !
What infatuation ! Personally I am
indifferent , but I really tremble for my
country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot
but fear that the exasperation of
the People will be so great at the
return of Ultratoryism , that the
Commons House upon a dissolution ,
which must be had , will be a mass
of Radicalism , & then God knows what
may happen ... .
# ' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble !
What infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really
tremble for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I
cannot but fear that the exasperation of the People
will be so great at the return of Ultratoryism ,
that the Commons House upon a dissolution , which
must be had , will be a mass of Radicalism , & then
God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really
tremble for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho'
I cannot but fear that the exasperation of the People
will be so great at the return of Ultratoryism ,
that the Commons House upon a dissolution , which must
be had , will be a mass of Radicalism , & then God
knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What infa-
tuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really tremble
for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot
but fear that the exasperation of the People will be so
great at the return of Ultratoryism , that the Commons
House upon a dissolution , which must be had , will be a
mass of Radicalism , & then God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What infatuation !
Personally I am indifferent , but I really tremble for my country ! I may
be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot but fear that the exasperation of the
People will be so great at the return of Ultratoryism , that the
Commons House upon a dissolution , which must be had , will be
a mass of Radicalism , & then God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really
tremble for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot
but fear that the exasperation of the People will be so great
at the return of Ultratoryism , that the Commons House
upon a dissolution , which must be had , will be a mass
of Radicalism , & then God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really
tremble for my country ! I may be mistaken ,
1tho' I cannot but fear that the exasperation
of the People will be so great at the return of
Ultratoryism , that the Commons House upon a
dissolution , which must be had , will be a mass
of Radicalism , & then God knows what may
happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really tremble
for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot but
fear that the exasperation of the People will be so
great at the return of Ultratoryism , that the Commons
House upon a dissolution , which must be had , will be a
mass of Radicalism , & then God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent ,
but I really tremble for my country ! I may
be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot but fear that
the exasperation of the People will be
so great at the return of Ultratoryism ,
that the Commons House upon a dissolution ,
which must be had , will be a mass of
may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really
tremble for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho'
I cannot but fear that the exasperation of the
People will be so great at the return of
Ultratoryism , that the Commons House upon
a dissolution , which must be had , will be a
mass of Radicalism , & then God knows what
may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really tremble
for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot but
fear that the exasperation of the People will be so
great at the return of Ultratoryism , that the Commons
House upon a dissolution , which must be had , will be a
mass of Radicalism , & then God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I
really tremble for my country ! I may be mistaken ,
1tho' I cannot but fear that the exasperation of
the People will be so great at the return of
Ultratoryism , that the Commons House upon a
dissolution , which must be had , will be a
mass of Radicalism , & then God knows
what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I
tremble ! What infatuation ! Personally
I am indifferent , but I really tremble
for my country ! I may be mistaken ,
1tho' I cannot but fear that the
exasperation of the People will
be so great at the return of Ultra-
toryism , that the Commons House upon
a dissolution , which must be had ,
will be a mass of Radicalism , &
then God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I
tremble ! What infatuation ! Personally
I am indifferent , but I really tremble
for my country ! I may be mistaken ,
1tho' I cannot but fear that the
exasperation of the People will be so
great at the return of Ultratoryism ,
that the Commons House upon a dis-
solution , which must be had , will
be a mass of Radicalism , & then
God knows what may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What infa-
tuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really tremble
for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I cannot but
fear that the exasperation of the People will be so great
at the return of Ultratoryism , that the Commons
House upon a dissolution , which must be had , will
be a mass of Radicalism , & then God knows what
may happen ... .
' What a frightful event ! ' he wrote . ' I tremble ! What
infatuation ! Personally I am indifferent , but I really
tremble for my country ! I may be mistaken , 1tho' I
cannot but fear that the exasperation of the People
will be so great at the return of Ultratoryism , that the
Commons House upon a dissolution , which must be had ,
will be a mass of Radicalism , & then God knows what
may happen ... .
God grant , however , that I may be a
false prophet & that all may go well .
Sir R. Peel was here , I understand , but
an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened
a new chapter in the history of
Anglesey's unceasing search for an effective
alleviation of his painful malady . None
of the numerous conventional remedies
to which he had been subjected ever
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet
& that all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here ,
I understand , but an express took him
off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new
chapter in the history of Anglesey's unceasing search
for an effective alleviation of his painful malady .
None of the numerous conventional remedies to which
he had been subjected ever since the symptoms had
first shown themselves seventeen years before had
had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet &
that all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I under-
stand , but an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a
new chapter in the history of Anglesey's unceasing
search for an effective alleviation of his painful
malady . None of the numerous conventional remedies
to which he had been subjected ever since the symp-
toms had first shown themselves seventeen years before
had had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet & that
all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I understand , but
an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter in
the history of Anglesey's unceasing search for an
effective alleviation of his painful malady . None of the
numerous conventional remedies to which he had been
subjected ever since the symptoms had first shown them-
selves seventeen years before had had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet & that all
may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I understand , but an express
took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter in the
history of Anglesey's unceasing search for an effective alleviation of
his painful malady . None of the numerous conventional remedies to
which he had been subjected ever since the symptoms had first
shown themselves seventeen years before had had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet
& that all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I understand ,
but an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter in
the history of Anglesey's unceasing search for an effective
alleviation of his painful malady . None of the numerous
conventional remedies to which he had been subjected
ever since the symptoms had first shown themselves
seventeen years before had had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet
& that all may go well . Sir R. Peel was
here , I understand , but an express took him off
yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new
chapter in the history of Anglesey's unceasing
search for an effective alleviation of his painful
malady . None of the numerous conventional
remedies to which he had been subjected ever
since the symptoms had first shown them-
selves seventeen years before had had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet
& that all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I understand ,
but an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter
in the history of Anglesey's unceasing search for an
effective alleviation of his painful malady . None of the
numerous conventional remedies to which he had been
subjected ever since the symptoms had first shown
themselves seventeen years before had had the
slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false
prophet & that all may go well . Sir R. Peel
was here , I understand , but an express took
him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a
new chapter in the history of Anglesey's
unceasing search for an effective alleviation
of his painful malady . None of the numer-
ous conventional remedies to which he had
been subjected ever since the symptoms
had first shown themselves seventeen years . .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet
& that all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I
understand , but an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter
in the history of Anglesey's unceasing search for
an effective alleviation of his painful malady . None
of the numerous conventional remedies to which he
had been subjected ever since the symptoms had
first shown themselves seventeen years before
had had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet & that
all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I understand ,
but an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter
in the history of Anglesey's unceasing search for
an effective alleviation of his painful malady . None
of the numerous conventional remedies to which he had
been subjected ever since the symptoms had first
shown themselves seventeen years before had had the
slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false
prophet & that all may go well . Sir R. Peel
was here , I understand , but an express took
him off yesterday . ' While he was in Naples
there had opened a new chapter in the
history of Anglesey's unceasing search for an
effective alleviation of his painful malady .
None of the numerous conventional remedies to
which he had been subjected ever since the
symptoms had first shown themselves seventeen
years before had had the slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false
prophet & that all may go well . Sir R.
Peel was here , I understand , but an
express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had
opened a new chapter in the history
of Anglesey's unceasing search for
an effective alleviation of his painful
malady . None of the numerous con-
ventional remedies to which he had
been subjected ever since the symptoms
God grant , however , that I may be a
false prophet & that all may go well .
Sir R. Peel was here , I understand , but
an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had
opened a new chapter in the history
of Anglesey's unceasing search for an
effective alleviation of his painful mala-
dy . None of the numerous conventional
remedies to which he had been subjected
ever since the symptoms had first
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet & that
all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I understand , but
an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter
in the history of Anglesey's unceasing search for an
effective alleviation of his painful malady . None of the
numerous conventional remedies to which he had been
subjected ever since the symptoms had first shown
themselves seventeen years before had had the
slightest effect .
God grant , however , that I may be a false prophet
& that all may go well . Sir R. Peel was here , I
understand , but an express took him off yesterday . '
While he was in Naples there had opened a new chapter
in the history of Anglesey's unceasing search for an
effective alleviation of his painful malady . None of
the numerous conventional remedies to which he had
been subjected ever since the symptoms had first
shown themselves seventeen years before had had
the slightest effect .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today ,
in the 1960s , no cure has been found for
the 6tic douloureux . As early as 1830 , when
Anglesey believed himself to be on the point
of death , the new German curative method
known as homoeopathy had been brought to
his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even
today , in the 1960s , no cure has been
found for the 6tic douloureux . As early
as 1830 , when Anglesey believed himself
to be on the point of death , the new
German curative method known as
homoeopathy had been brought to
his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in
the 1960s , no cure has been found for the
6tic douloureux . As early as 1830 , when
Anglesey believed himself to be on the point of
death , the new German curative method known as
homoeopathy had been brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in the
1960s , no cure has been found for the 6tic douloureux .
As early as 1830 , when Anglesey believed himself to be
on the point of death , the new German curative method
known as homoeopathy had been brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in the
1960s , no cure has been found for the 6tic
douloureux . As early as 1830 , when Anglesey believed
himself to be on the point of death , the new German
curative method known as homoeopathy had been
brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in the 1960s ,
no cure has been found for the 6tic douloureux . As early as
1830 , when Anglesey believed himself to be on the point of death ,
the new German curative method known as homoeopathy had been
brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in the 1960s ,
no cure has been found for the 6tic douloureux . As
early as 1830 , when Anglesey believed himself to be on the
point of death , the new German curative method known as
homoeopathy had been brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in
the 1960s , no cure has been found for the
6tic douloureux . As early as 1830 , when
Anglesey believed himself to be on the
point of death , the new German curative
method known as homoeopathy had been
brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in the
1960s , no cure has been found for the 6tic douloureux . As
early as 1830 , when Anglesey believed himself to be on
the point of death , the new German curative method known
as homoeopathy had been brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today ,
in the 1960s , no cure has been found for
the 6tic douloureux . As early as 1830 , when
Anglesey believed himself to be on the
point of death , the new German curative
method known as homoeopathy had been
brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in
the 1960s , no cure has been found for the
6tic douloureux . As early as 1830 , when Anglesey
believed himself to be on the point of death ,
the new German curative method known as
homoeopathy had been brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in the
1960s , no cure has been found for the 6tic douloureux .
As early as 1830 , when Anglesey believed himself to be
on the point of death , the new German curative method
known as homoeopathy had been brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today ,
in the 1960s , no cure has been found for the
6tic douloureux . As early as 1830 , when
Anglesey believed himself to be on the
point of death , the new German curative
method known as homoeopathy had
been brought to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even
today , in the 1960s , no cure has been
found for the 6tic douloureux . As early
as 1830 , when Anglesey believed himself
to be on the point of death , the new
German curative method known as
homoeopathy had been brought to his
notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even
today , in the 1960s , no cure has been
found for the 6tic douloureux . As early
as 1830 , when Anglesey believed him-
self to be on the point of death ,
the new German curative method
known as homoeopathy had been
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in the
1960s , no cure has been found for the 6tic douloureux .
As early as 1830 , when Anglesey believed himself to
be on the point of death , the new German curative
method known as homoeopathy had been brought
to his notice .
Nor is this to be wondered at , for even today , in
the 1960s , no cure has been found for the 6tic
douloureux . As early as 1830 , when Anglesey believed
himself to be on the point of death , the new
German curative method known as homoeopathy
had been brought to his notice .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law ,
the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to
advise Anglesey to give the system a trial , adding
that it was being cultivated with extraordinary
success in France and Italy , and that he
himself was being treated under a doctor who
had studied under its founder , the aged
Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's
brother-in-law , the diplomatist Lord
Ponsonby , had written to advise Anglesey to
give the system a trial , adding that it
was being cultivated with extraordinary
success in France and Italy , and that
he himself was being treated under a
doctor who had studied under its
founder , the aged Dr. Samuel
Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law ,
the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise
Anglesey to give the system a trial , adding that
it was being cultivated with extraordinary success in
France and Italy , and that he himself was being
treated under a doctor who had studied under
its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law , the
diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise Anglesey
to give the system a trial , adding that it was being
cultivated with extraordinary success in France and Italy ,
and that he himself was being treated under a doctor
who had studied under its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel
Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law , the
diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise Anglesey
to give the system a trial , adding that it was being
cultivated with extraordinary success in France and Italy ,
and that he himself was being treated under a doctor
who had studied under its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel
Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law , the
diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise Anglesey to give the
system a trial , adding that it was being cultivated with extraordinary
success in France and Italy , and that he himself was being treated
under a doctor who had studied under its founder , the aged Dr.
Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law , the
diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise Anglesey
to give the system a trial , adding that it was being cultivated
with extraordinary success in France and Italy , and that he
himself was being treated under a doctor who had studied
under its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law ,
the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to
advise Anglesey to give the system a trial , adding
that it was being cultivated with extraordinary
success in France and Italy , and that he
himself was being treated under a doctor who
had studied under its founder , the aged
Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law ,
the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise
Anglesey to give the system a trial , adding that it was
being cultivated with extraordinary success in France and
Italy , and that he himself was being treated under a
doctor who had studied under its founder , the aged
Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-
in-law , the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had
written to advise Anglesey to give the system
a trial , adding that it was being cultivated
with extraordinary success in France and
Italy , and that he himself was being
treated under a doctor who had studied
under its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel
Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law ,
the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise
Anglesey to give the system a trial , adding that it
was being cultivated with extraordinary success in
France and Italy , and that he himself was being
treated under a doctor who had studied under
its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law , the
diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise Anglesey
to give the system a trial , adding that it was being
cultivated with extraordinary success in France and
Italy , and that he himself was being treated under a
doctor who had studied under its founder , the aged
Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's
brother-in-law , the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby ,
had written to advise Anglesey to give the
system a trial , adding that it was being
cultivated with extraordinary success in
France and Italy , and that he himself was
being treated under a doctor who had
studied under its founder , the aged
Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's
brother-in-law , the diplomatist Lord
Ponsonby , had written to advise Angle-
sey to give the system a trial , adding
that it was being cultivated with
extraordinary success in France and
Italy , and that he himself was being
treated under a doctor who had
studied under its founder , the aged
Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's bro-
ther-in-law , the diplomatist Lord Pon-
sonby , had written to advise Anglesey
to give the system a trial , adding that it
was being cultivated with extraordinary
success in France and Italy , and that
he himself was being treated under
a doctor who had studied under
its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel
Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law , the diplomatist
Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise Anglesey to give the
system a trial , adding that it was being cultivated with
extraordinary success in France and Italy , and that he
himself was being treated under a doctor who had
studied under its founder , the aged Dr. Samuel
Hahnemann .
In April of that year his first wife's brother-in-law ,
the diplomatist Lord Ponsonby , had written to advise
Anglesey to give the system a trial , adding that it was
being cultivated with extraordinary success in France
and Italy , and that he himself was being treated under
a doctor who had studied under its founder , the aged
Dr. Samuel Hahnemann .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two later
as ' more like a God upon earth than a human
being ' , had an increasing number of disciples
among unorthodox medical men in the cities
of Europe . One of these was the Neapolitan ,
Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey consulted
in # May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two
later as ' more like a God upon earth than
a human being ' , had an increasing number
of disciples among unorthodox medical men
in the cities of Europe . One of these
was the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro ,
whom Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two
later as ' more like a God upon earth than
a human being ' , had an increasing number of
disciples among unorthodox medical men in the
cities of Europe . One of these was the
Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey
consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two later as
' more like a God upon earth than a human being ' ,
had an increasing number of disciples among unorthodox
medical men in the cities of Europe . One of these
was the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey
consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis Burdett
described to Anglesey a year or two later as ' more like a God
upon earth than a human being ' , had an increasing number
of disciples among unorthodox medical men in the cities of
Europe . One of these was the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro ,
whom Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis Burdett described
to Anglesey a year or two later as ' more like a God upon earth
than a human being ' , had an increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities of Europe . One of these was
the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey consulted in
May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two later as
' more like a God upon earth than a human being ' , had an
increasing number of disciples among unorthodox medical
men in the cities of Europe . One of these was the Neapolitan ,
Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two later as
' more like a God upon earth than a human being ' ,
had an increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities of Europe .
One of these was the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro ,
whom Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two later as
' more like a God upon earth than a human being ' , had
an increasing number of disciples among unorthodox
medical men in the cities of Europe . One of these
was the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom
Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir
Francis Burdett described to Anglesey a
year or two later as ' more like a God
upon earth than a human being ' , had
an increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities
Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey
consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir
Francis Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two
later as ' more like a God upon earth than
a human being ' , had an increasing number of
disciples among unorthodox medical men in the
cities of Europe . One of these was the Neapolitan ,
Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey consulted in
May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two later as
' more like a God upon earth than a human being ' ,
had an increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities of Europe .
One of these was the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro ,
whom Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir
Francis Burdett described to Anglesey a
year or two later as ' more like a God
upon earth than a human being ' , had an
increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities of
Europe . One of these was the Neapolitan ,
Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey
consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir
Francis Burdett described to Anglesey a
year or two later as ' more like a God
upon earth than a human being ' , had
an increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities
of Europe . One of these was the
Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom
Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom
Sir Francis Burdett described to Anglesey
a year or two later as ' more like a God
upon earth than a human being ' , had
an increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities
of Europe . One of these was the Neapo-
consulted in May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis Burdett
described to Anglesey a year or two later as ' more like a
God upon earth than a human being ' , had an increasing
number of disciples among unorthodox medical men in the
cities of Europe . One of these was the Neapolitan ,
Dr Giuseppe Mauro , whom Anglesey consulted in
May 1834 .
This remarkable man of medicine , whom Sir Francis
Burdett described to Anglesey a year or two later as
' more like a God upon earth than a human being ' ,
had an increasing number of disciples among
unorthodox medical men in the cities of Europe . One
of these was the Neapolitan , Dr Giuseppe Mauro ,
whom Anglesey consulted in May 1834 .
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered
master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice .
In doing so he described his distinguished patient
and his symptoms . He told Hahnemann that he
found Anglesey a strong , energetic man with a
gentle and charming character , even-tempered
and sedate , not easily irritated , patient and
persevering , ' but he appears to despair of ever
# being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered
master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for
advice . In doing so he described his distinguished
patient and his symptoms . He told Hahnemann
that he found Anglesey a strong , energetic man
with a gentle and charming character ,
even-tempered and sedate , not easily irritated ,
patient and persevering , ' but he appears to
despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered
master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for
advice . In doing so he described his distinguished
patient and his symptoms . He told Hahnemann
that he found Anglesey a strong , energetic man
with a gentle and charming character , even-tempered
and sedate , not easily irritated , patient and
# persevering , ' but he appears to despair of
ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered
master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice .
In doing so he described his distinguished patient
and his symptoms . He told Hahnemann that he found
Anglesey a strong , energetic man with a gentle and
charming character , even-tempered and sedate , not
easily irritated , patient and persevering ,
' but he appears to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered master at
Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing so he
described his distinguished patient and his symptoms . He
told Hahnemann that he found Anglesey a strong , energetic
man with a gentle and charming character , even-tempered
and sedate , not easily irritated , patient and persevering ,
' but he appears to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered master at Ko"then ,
near Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing so he described his
distinguished patient and his symptoms . He told Hahnemann that he
found Anglesey a strong , energetic man with a gentle and charming
character , even-tempered and sedate , not easily irritated , patient and
persevering , ' but he appears to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered master
at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing so he
described his distinguished patient and his symptoms . He told
Hahnemann that he found Anglesey a strong , energetic man
with a gentle and charming character , even-tempered and
sedate , not easily irritated , patient and persevering , ' but he
appears to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered master
at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing
so he described his distinguished patient and his
symptoms . He told Hahnemann that he found Anglesey
a strong , energetic man with a gentle and charming
character , even-tempered and sedate , not easily
irritated , patient and persevering , ' but he appears
to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered master
at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing so
he described his distinguished patient and his symptoms .
He told Hahnemann that he found Anglesey a strong ,
energetic man with a gentle and charming character ,
even-tempered and sedate , not easily irritated , patient
and persevering , ' but he appears to despair of ever being
cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered
master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for
that he found Anglesey a strong , energetic
man with a gentle and charming character ,
even-tempered and sedate , not easily
he appears to despair of ever being
cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered
master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking
for advice . In doing so he described his
distinguished patient and his symptoms . He
told Hahnemann that he found Anglesey a
strong , energetic man with a gentle and
charming character , even-tempered and sedate ,
not easily irritated , patient and persevering ,
' but he appears to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered
master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice .
In doing so he described his distinguished patient and
his symptoms . He told Hahnemann that he found
Anglesey a strong , energetic man with a gentle and
charming character , even-tempered and sedate ,
not easily irritated , patient and persevering ,
' but he appears to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his
revered master at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking
for advice . In doing so he described his
distinguished patient and his symptoms . He
told Hahnemann that he found Anglesey a
strong , energetic man with a gentle and
charming character , even-tempered and
sedate , not easily irritated , patient and
persevering , ' but he appears to despair
of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his
revered master at Ko"then , near
Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing
so he described his distinguished
patient and his symptoms . He told
Hahnemann that he found Anglesey
a strong , energetic man with a gentle
and charming character , even-tempered
and sedate , not easily irritated ,
patient and persevering , ' but he
appears to despair of ever being
Mauro's first action was to write to his re-
vered master at Ko"then , near Leipzig ,
asking for advice . In doing so he descri-
bed his distinguished patient and his
symptoms . He told Hahnemann that he found
Anglesey a strong , energetic man with a
gentle and charming character , even-tem-
pered and sedate , not easily irritated ,
patient and persevering , ' but he appears
to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered master at Ko"then ,
near Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing so he described his
distinguished patient and his symptoms . He told Hahnemann
that he found Anglesey a strong , energetic man with a
gentle and charming character , even-tempered and
sedate , not easily irritated , patient and persevering ,
' but he appears to despair of ever being cured . '
Mauro's first action was to write to his revered master
at Ko"then , near Leipzig , asking for advice . In doing
so he described his distinguished patient and his
symptoms . He told Hahnemann that he found Anglesey
a strong , energetic man with a gentle and charming
character , even-tempered and sedate , not easily
irritated , patient and persevering , ' but he appears to
despair of ever being cured . '
Later in the year , the idea of some sort of
public employment was again in the air . Lady
Cowper , for instance , told Princess Lieven on
September 25th that Anglesey was very much
annoyed at not obtaining the Admiralty in place
of Lord Auckland , who had gone to govern India .
If there was any truth in this , Lord Melbourne's
letter of the following day , offering Anglesey the
Government of Gibraltar , may have been a
sop .
' It is ' , he wrote , ' one of the best military situations
which the Crown has to bestow - the salary has
been settled ... at five thousand pounds yearly , it
being understood that the Governor is not here-
after to be absent from his post . It has struck
me that 1altho' very improbable it is not quite
impossible that you might be willing to accept of
this appointment . '
The reply was not bereft of asperity : ' Beaudesert ,
Sept. 27 , 1835 ' Dear Melbourne , ' I have received
your letter of yesterday . ' I am not prepared to spend
the remainder of my life at Gibraltar , & moreover
( if even residence were not the condition ) , having
no taste for a sinecure , I have only to thank
you for the offer & to decline it .
' I remain , dear Melbourne , faithfully yours , ' ANGLESEY '
Soon after his return from Europe , Clarence Paget
had become seriously ill with a supposed abscess
on the lungs . After months of suffering , his life was
almost despaired of when as a last resort it was
suggested that the patient should be taken to consult
Hahnemann once again .
It was no longer necessary to go further than Paris ,
for by this time the great man had been driven
from his native Germany by the antipathy of his
orthodox brethren . The main difficulty was how to
make the expedition from England without killing the
patient before he completed it . The problem was
overcome in an interesting manner .
' Fortunately , ' wrote Clarence in after years , ' the
King ... remembered there was a luxurious old bed
travelling-carriage in the royal coach-houses , which
had carried his brother , George 4 . , and he kindly
placed it at the disposal of my father . Into it I was
put , more dead than alive , and we got across to
Calais , and from thence by easy stages to
Paris ...
He wrote down every symptom , examined me all
over , asked ever so many questions which I had
scarcely strength to answer , and took up his gold-
headed cane to depart . My father hung upon every
word , but could get nothing from him .
WHEN HE SAW TRELAWNY'S PRINTED LETTER ,
LORD SIDNEY WROTE TO DOUGLAS KINNAIRD
SAYING THAT IT WAS INCORRECT THROUGHOUT . HE
HAD NO SOONER HEARD FROM COUNT GAMBA AND
FLETCHER THAT BYRON WOULD HAVE WISHED
HIS BODY TO RETURN TO ENGLAND THAN THAT
COURSE WAS ' IMMEDIATELY CARRIED INTO
EFFECT ' - NOT IN SPITE OF HIMSELF AND SIR
FREDERICK STOVEN , BUT WITH THEIR PERFECT
CONCURRENCE , WHILE ' GENERAL ADAM WAS AT
CORFU THE WHOLE TIME AND NEVER INTER-
FERED IN THE SLIGHTEST DEGREE ABOUT ...
When he saw Trelawny's printed letter , Lord Sidney wrote
to Douglas Kinnaird saying that it was incorrect
throughout . He had no sooner heard from Count Gamba
and Fletcher that Byron would have wished his
body to return to England than that course was
' immediately carried into effect ' - not in spite of himself
and Sir Frederick Stoven , but with their perfect con-
currence , while ' General Adam was at Corfu the whole
time and # never interfered in the slightest
degree about the matter ' .
HIS ONLY REFERENCE TO TRELAWNY BY NAME IN
THE COURSE OF SEVERAL COMMUNICATIONS TO
HOBHOUSE AND KINNAIRD ABOUT BYRON'S AFFAIRS
IS SATIRICAL : ' I HAVE NOT THE 1HONOR OF ANY
ACQUAINTANCE WITH MR TRELAWNY WHO SEEMS TO
HAVE HAD CHARGE OF THE MULE WHEN COUNT
GAMBA ACCOMPANIED THE REMAINS OF OUR
DECEASED FRIEND TO ZANTE ... . . ' IF TRELAWNY
FAILED EVEN TO MEET LORD SIDNEY AND THE
BRITISH GOVERNMENT'S OTHER REPRESENTATIVES
IN THE ISLANDS , WHILE THEY WARMLY WELCOMED ...
His only reference to Trelawny by name in the course of several
communications to Hobhouse and Kinnaird about Byron's affairs is
satirical : ' I have not the 1honor of any acquaintance with Mr
Trelawny who seems to have had charge of the Mule when Count
Gamba accompanied the remains of our deceased friend to Zante ... . '
If Trelawny failed even to meet Lord Sidney and the British
Government's other representatives in the islands , while they
warmly welcomed Gamba to their counsels , it would go far to
explain his attempts to exalt himself at the young
Italian's expense .
IN HIS POPULAR AND ACUTELY UNRELIABLE
BOOK ON BYRON AND SHELLEY , TRELAWNY
IMPLIES THAT NOT ONLY GAMBA BUT FLETCHER
AND TITA AND THE STEWARD , LEGA ZAMBELLI ,
FAILED TO PERFORM THE MOST ELEMENTARY
DUTIES TOWARDS THE DEAD . HE PRETENDS
TO HAVE FOUND EVERYTHING IN UTTERMOST
DISORDER - ' TOKENS THAT THE PILGRIM
HAD MOST TREASURED , SCATTERED ON THE
FLOOR , - AS RUBBISH OF NO MARKE-
TABLE VALUE , AND TRAMPLED ON ' .
In his popular and acutely unreliable book on Byron and
Shelley , Trelawny implies that not only Gamba but Fletcher
and Tita and the steward , Lega Zambelli , failed to perform
the most elementary duties towards the dead . He pretends
to have found everything in uttermost disorder - ' tokens that
the Pilgrim had most treasured , scattered on the floor , -
as rubbish of no marketable value , and trampled on ' .
This was to give colour to his pretext for copying Byron's last
letter to his sister , which was that its chance of reaching its
destination had seemed slight . The collection of Pietro
Gamba's letters deposited among the Murray manuscripts show
that the greatest care was observed in gathering together all the possessions
of a man whose importance was fully recognized by everyone about
him . ' I have had put under Government seal his belongings ,
which will be opened by Prince Alexander Mavrocordato
in my presence and that of certain Englishmen who are
here .
I have taken an exact inventory of them . '
Thus on April 21st , several days before
Trelawny appeared , Gamba wrote to Lord
presence of leading Missolonghi officials
was amongst them .
I have taken an exact inventory of them . ' Thus on April 21st , several
days before Trelawny appeared , Gamba wrote to Lord Sidney Osborne ,
and his inventory has been preserved . The papers were reopened in
the presence of leading Missolonghi officials in order to make
sure that no recent will was amongst them .
It may have been then that Trelawny contrived to do
his copying . Considering that Pietro was not above
one of the most intelligent as well as the most
sympathetic of Byron's 6entourage in Greece . With
and wrote to Lady Byron after she had
Count Gamba - which was very distressing
is a pleasing , fine looking young man &
spoke with great feeling . The unfortunate
Augusta was in one of her worst states of
confusion .
Augusta Leigh too was favourably impressed , and wrote
to Lady Byron after she had received a visit from
him : I have today seen Count Gamba - which was very
distressing for many reasons but quite unavoidable -
he is a pleasing , fine looking young man & spoke
with great feeling . The unfortunate Augusta was
in one of her worst states of confusion .
She had loved Byron , but she had
betrayed him , betrayed him not twice , as
he had betrayed her , but again and again
over a long span of time , fawning on his
the unguarded letters he never suspected
any eye but her own would see , feeding
the stealthy fires of her animosity : and
and almost to hate him .
She had loved Byron , but she had betrayed him ,
betrayed him not twice , as he had betrayed her ,
but again and again over a long span of time ,
fawning on his implacable wife , purveying to her
in secret the unguarded letters he never
suspected any eye but her own would see ,
feeding the stealthy fires of her animosity :
and having betrayed him , she had grown to
fear and almost to hate him .
She had dreaded his outpourings of affection
for her in poetry that he thought would clear
her and that only compromised her , and the
headstrong folly that tempted him to write on
ever more daring themes , teaching the world
preyed upon his thoughts .
She had dreaded his outpourings of affection for
her in poetry that he thought would clear
her and that only compromised her , and #
the headstrong folly that tempted him to
write on ever more daring themes , teaching
the world to guess what repentance and
unrepentance preyed upon his thoughts .
She had dreaded still more that he might
return to England , overshadowing her again
with spiritual and social peril . But this kind
of return was what she could never have
foreseen ... that he # should come back not
voluble but silent , not beautiful but defaced ,
not in obloquy but with his praises ringing !
She could remember now his exciting laughter ,
his almost filial love for her , her almost
maternal love for him .
Above all she could remember the anguish of their
parting , and how he had been ' convulsed , absolutely
convulsed with grief ' . So love revived , and in
its most sentimental form . While he lived
she had lost touch in her perpetual alarms
with what was best in him ; dead his memory
became sacred to her .
She felt almost as strongly as Hobhouse
# about biographies . Quite apart from the
divagations of her ' poor brother ' - so she
constantly referred to him - there were a
hundred reasons why it would be
objectionable to have the family history
exposed . Whatever latitude she allowed in
the warmth of her kindly nature to others -
or to herself - she believed implicitly in
the moral code she had learned from
her good grandmother , the Countess of
She had no desire to see in print that her
mother , who was to have been a duchess , had
been involved in a scandalous and ruinous
divorce , that her father , ' Mad Jack Byron ' , was
a profligate and a bankrupt who had
squandered every penny two successive wives
had brought him and left the second on
the verge of destitution , and that he had died
a drunkard and perhaps a suicide , hiding
in France to escape his creditors .
It was no more pleasant for the Hon. Augusta
Leigh to share this kind of story with the world
than it would be for most 20th-century ladies
moving in court circles and having children to
be settled advantageously in life . She had lived
down the rumours which had made the year of
the Byron separation a nightmare to her , and she
had also succeeded , though with an increasing
sense of effort , in persuading her little world to
avert its eyes from her husband , ' that drone ' ,
as # Byron called him , whose career of
She had earned the right to be left in peace .
Byron's fame was , of course , very wonderful , but
it carried with it too many reminders of his
terrible indiscretions - the writing of Don Juan ,
which she had never ceased to deplore , his
shocking blasphemies like the Vision of Judgement ,
his making friends with the atheist known to
her as ' that infamous Mr. Shelley ' , and his
mixing with really low and horrid people such
as the subversive journalist Leigh Hunt , whom
on would never conceivably meet in decent society .
She was most emphatically opposed to the
production of sheer indelicacies , and that was
the light in which she saw the proposed book
by Dallas . Letters between a mother and a son -
a son so outspoken and a mother so far from
suitable to be paraded before the public !
And brought out by that seedy poor relation ,
Dallas ! Could anything be in worse taste ?
Hanson , the solicitor , was naturally remunerated
for his services , but all Mr Hobhouse's duties
as executor were performed without reward .
And now there was more trouble brewing
with those unbearable Dallases . Dallas
senior was detained in Paris by severe
illness , but Dallas junior was full of
fight and applying for the injunction
to be lifted .
He had gone to Byron's cousin , now 7th
lord , and had got him to compose an
affidavit to the effect that , whereas he
had formerly been reluctant to approve the
publication unless it had first been
examined by the relatives and friends of
his predecessor , he had now read the
book and was content for it to be
issued without that precaution .
There were few things in Augusta's whole
life , full of calamities though it was , that
hurt her more than this contemptuous slight
from George Anson Byron , whom she had
loved with an unswerving loyalty , and had looked
on as her intimate friend . Moreover , he
was without the right to make such
pronouncements : he had inherited nothing
from her brother but his title , whereas
she was not only of nearer consanguinity
but the chosen recipient of his property .
These , if she had only known it , were
precisely the reasons why her cousin took
pleasure in the opportunity of annoying her .
Lady Byron did not like Augusta to have
intimate friends , and in every instance where
the occasion was granted her , she managed
to find some excuse for bestowing , in whole
or in part , those confidences which never
failed to leave her audience agape with
wonder at her magnanimity and Augusta's
wickedness .
George Anson Byron had seen enough of
the poet's atrocious conduct as a husband
to be aware that Augusta , so far from
being responsible for the collapse of the
marriage , had been Lady Byron's greatest
support and comfort at the time ; but it
had been deemed necessary all the
same to enlighten him as to the suspicions
in the background , and he had repeated
them to his newly married wife .
her practically all his money caused it to
crumble to oblivion . Though Lady Byron
knew perfectly well that Byron , as early
as the year of their wedding , 1815 , had
Captain Byron that he had been left
title .
' Respecting the will ' , he wrote to Byron's widow a few days after
hearing its contents , ' the very thought of it is painful to me .
What Mary has said about it is too true . ' What Mary , the
new Lady Byron , had said about it was written on the first half
sheet of the same paper : My dearest Annabella , The more we
consider the most prominent subject in your letter , the more
we are convinced of the truth of that dreadful history
connected with it .
Questions about marriage and children were
again included , as they had been at the
1911 and 1951 Censuses . The former had asked
the age of 50 . The 1961 Census questions
fifteen years earlier by the 1946 Family
Census conducted on behalf of the Royal
Commission on Population .
the date of birth of each child , as had been done
The innovation at the 1961 Census , though the
Family Census had previously included
the question , was the date of termination
of the first or only marriage . This enables
as regards duration of marriage and
number of children in the case of women
by widowhood or divorce after the end
of their child bearing life .
This is particularly important in estimating the trends
in the size and pattern of families for successive
generations over as long a period as possible , as the
proportion of widows predominates in the higher age
groups . In Wales and Monmouthshire the question
on the ability to speak Welsh was included as
previously . The question was first asked in 1891 , and
was given its present form in 1931 .
Each census since the first in 1801 has included questions
about housing and households . In 1961 the scope of the
question was wider than before , because of the great
use of the data to the Ministry of Housing and Local
Government and to local authorities . As before , the record
made during the enumeration lists all buildings , residen-
tial premises and temporary places of abode , and all
households occupying them , as the basis of the
enumeration is the household schedule .
The number of structurally separate dwellings ( that is ,
houses or flats or other quarters built or adapted for
separate occupation and forming a private and structurally
separate unit ) was obtained as previously , together with the
number of households with sole occupation or sharing
such dwellings , and the number of living rooms occu-
pied by each household .
A new question asked about housing tenure , whether
the accommodation occupied by each household was held by
them as owner-occupiers ; occupied in connection with
employment or as part of business premises ; rented
from a Council ( or New Town Corporation ) or a private
landlord ( if so , whether furnished or unfurnished ) ; or
occupied on some other terms . The analysis of private
households by size and various characteristics of their
members has become increasingly important .
Previously , while visitors were left out of this
analysis it was not considered sufficiently
important to attempt the task of bringing
in the members away from home on Census
night , which would be very laborious in the
absence of information given at their place
of usual residence ( n log n ) . But the need
for a more accurate distribution of
households by size as usually constituted
had become more important by 1961 , and
The information collected under
this head will not affect the
main count of population numbers ,
but will be used solely in the
analysis of households by size
and other characteristics . Sample . -
At an early stage of the census
preparations consideration was
given to possibilities of reducing
We have held eleven meetings . We decided as a
first step to seek information from a number
of organisations and persons having an interest
in the questions before us and at a later stage we
arranged for publication of a press notice inviting
anybody interested to submit representations . We
compiled a list of the points which we thought
were of importance , but we made it clear that
the replies need not be confined to these
particular items .
As a general rule we did not ask for oral evidence , though
1 gives a list of the bodies and persons consulted . The
the Ministry of Health submitted evidence to us ;
officers of these Departments attended our meetings
and have given us valuable assistance .
On 23rd November , 1959 , we submitted
an Interim Report . This dealt with two questions
which arose from our terms of reference and
which had been brought specially to our notice .
First , we were asked to examine the risks
attending the abuse of carbromal and
bromvaletone and preparations containing these
substances . The Poisons Board had already
considered this problem but , in the absence of
sufficient evidence that these compounds
4 . On examination of the evidence it became clear
to us that carbromal and bromvaletone were examples
of a number of drugs on sale to the public which
were not appropriate for restriction to supply on
prescription under the Dangerous Drugs Act , 1951 ,
or the Therapeutic Substances Act , 1956 , and had
not so far been recommended for control as
poisons .
5 . We recommended that , in general , any drug or
pharmaceutical preparation which has an action on the
central nervous system and is liable to produce physical
on prescription and that an independent expert body
should be responsible for advising which substances
should be so controlled . 6 . As an interim and urgent
on the recommendation of the Poisons Board , has
We are glad to note the action that has been taken
and we hope that arrangements will be made to ensure
that , as other preparations affecting the central nervous
system become available , they too will be brought to
the notice of the Poisons Board , or such other advisory
body as may in due course be appointed for the
purpose , to consider whether there are sufficient
grounds for restricting any of them also to supply
on prescription .
8 . The second part of our Interim Report was
devoted to anaesthetists who become addicted
to the gases and vapours which they use in the
course of their professional duties . We
ascertained that the incidence of this irregular-
ity was very small indeed . However , over a
period of eleven years , patients' lives had been
endangered in two known instances .
We were assured by our expert witnesses on this
subject that , with the apparatus at present to hand , the
preliminary sniffing of the gases immediately before
administering them to a patient was a recognised and
necessary precaution . We accepted this . 10 . In view of
the heavy and direct responsibility carried by every
anaesthetist we were convinced that anyone addicted
to the inhalation of gases and vapours should never be
entrusted with their administration .
The main tasks of the Rolleston Committee , whose advice
we were invited to review , were to advise on : ( a ) the
circumstances , if any , in which the supply of morphine
and heroin , and preparations containing these substances ,
to persons addicted to those drugs might be regarded
as medically advisable ; ( b ) the precautions which medical
practitioners administering or prescribing morphine or
heroin should adopt to avoid abuse and any
administrative measures that seemed expedient to
secure observance of those precautions .
inspection then in operation cases were
at that time in which exceptionally
had been supplied to particular practi-
tioners or prescribed for individual
cases . On further enquiry it was
ascertained that sometimes the
doctor had ordered these drugs simply
dangerous drugs were being supplied in
aspects of the treatment of addiction , ...
The Rolleston Committee's recommen-
dations in 1926 on the supply of morphine
and heroin to addicts to these drugs and
on the use of drugs in treatment are discussed
later in this Report . They have , up to now ,
been included in the Memorandum on
the Dangerous Drugs Act and Regulations
which is prepared by the Home Office
for the information of doctors and
dentists .
The Secretary of State was empowered , on the recommendation of a
tribunal , to withdraw a doctor's authority to possess and supply
dangerous drugs and to direct that such a doctor , or a doctor
convicted of an offence under the Act , should not issue
prescriptions for dangerous drugs . ( 3 ) It was made clear
that prescriptions should only be given by a duly qualified
medical practitioner when required for purposes of
medical treatment .
Nevertheless , average net family income
was appreciably higher in families with
several children than in those with only ,
many of which were incomplete families
of younger parents with lower earnings ,
and of course with lower tax reliefs and
no family allowances . The rise in net family
incomes between 1954 and 1959 was great-
est for childless couples , especially older
couples ( probably because of the
Compared with 1958 , the expenditure index for 1959
showed increases of 4 to 6 per cent for couples without
children and those with one child , and much smaller
changes for couples with several children . The quantity
index , which has risen only slowly since 1956 , was
almost unchanged in 1959 for couples with two or more
children , but rose by 3 per cent in the older two-adult
households and by 1-2 per cent for younger childless
couples and couples with one child .
As in 1958 , younger couples paid some 12 1/2 per cent
more per calorie than the national average , and families
with four or more children 19 per cent less . The only
substantial change was in families with three children ,
for whom the index declined from 91 to 88 . Table 27
also shows the corresponding values of an index which
compares the prices paid by different types of household
for the commodities constituting the average household
diet in 1959 .
For all foods the range was from 3.6 per cent above the national average
in younger two-adult households to 4.8 per cent below in families with
four or more children , compared with +3.6 to -5.4 per cent in 1958
and +2.8 to -2.6 per cent in 1957 . As with the price of energy index ,
the only noteworthy change was for households with three children ,
in which the index fell by 1.8 to 97.5 per cent of the average for
all households in the sample .
The price ranges for milk ,
cheese , sugar , bread and flour
were very narrow . For most other
foods younger childless couples paid
the highest average prices and
large families the lowest , the price
gradients being steepest for
carcase meat ( +7 to -7 per cent ) ,
( +9 to -9 ) and beverages other than
tea ( +12 to -16 ) .
Consumption by younger childless couples declined
throughout this period , but that of the smaller families was
milk subsidy was reduced in April 1957 .
75 . The smaller families and the residual groups of
households containing children reduced their consumption
of sugar and of preserves , but in all other types of
household a decline in purchases of the one was
accompanied by an increase in consumption of the other .
76 . Most groups spent slightly less on potatoes than in
the previous year , but consumption was maintained
except in families with more than one child and in
the unclassified households with children or
adolescents .
All groups except families with four or more children
or with adolescents but no children consumed more fresh green
vegetables , especially in the first half of the year , although most
reduced their consumption of other vegetables . Purchases of
quick-frozen peas and beans generally increased , but extreme-
ly wide group differences persisted , the averages ranging from
0.1 oz. per head per week in families with four or more
children to 0.9 oz. per head in younger two-adult
households ; average consumption by older couples and other
wholly-adult households was 0.5 oz. per head per week .
The two latter groups consumed much smaller
quantities per head of canned vegetables and canned and
bottled tomatoes than any other group , and much smaller
quantities of canned and bottled fruit than younger
childless couples ; in households containing children ,
consumption of canned fruit fell off sharply with
increasing family size , but there was no regular
gradation in purchases of canned vegetables and canned
tomatoes .
All types of household benefited from the improved
supplies and lower prices of fresh fruit compared
with 1958 , but the increase in consumption was
least in families containing children . 77 . Total
bread consumption was virtually unchanged ,
although most types of household bought less
white bread and more rolls and speciality
breads than in 1958 . Most groups increased
their purchases of puddings , cakes and biscuits ,
but obtained less flour .
78 . Regression estimates of the expenditure on
different commodities attributable to the adult
couple and each additional child in a selected
group of households consisting of childless couples
( both under 55 ) and couples with different numbers
of children were given for 1952-56 in Table 39 of
the Annual Report for 1956 . The younger childless
couples are broadly comparable in age and family
income with the family households , so that differences
in food expenditure may be associated with the
presence of children .
The relative expenditure per child declined from 1952 to 1956 ,
but rose in 1957 when the subsidy on welfare and national dried
milk was reduced ; since 1957 it has again declined . Most of the
average expenditure associated with a child was on cereal foods ,
potatoes and milk ; for fresh green vegetables , fruit , cheese , fish and
carcase meat , the incremental expenditure was slight .
79 . Table 30 shows the energy value and nutrient content of
showed little change compared with those for the previous year ,
except for generally increased intakes of vitamins C and D .
and level of activity , comparisons between families of different
composition are only apposite when considered in relation
to needs .
80 . Estimates of the adequacy of the diets , assessed by
comparison with allowances based on the recommendations
of the British Medical Association , are also shown in Table 30 .
In comparison with the previous year , changes were small
except for higher estimates for vitamin C . In families with
four or more children the levels of adequacy for all
nutrients other than vitamin C decreased slightly .
For this fairly small group , comparisons between different
years cannot be made so precisely as in groups with a
defined number of children . In 1959 the households in
this group contained slightly more children ( average 4.64 )
than in the previous year ( average 4.53 ) . Their total food
expenditure increased less than that in other groups ,
and they purchased more of certain foods such as fish ,
poultry , eggs , canned vegetables , fresh fruit , chocolate
biscuits and breakfast cereals which , in general , are more
expensive sources of nutrients than those foods of which
they purchased less , namely dried milk , potatoes , carcase
meat , sugar , bread , flour and oatmeal and oat products .
5 . Other forms of war damage payment made by the Commission
are highway payments , clearance payments ( for clearing remains of
structures from " total loss " sites ) and church payments . Although
differing in certain important ways from the ordinary cost of
works payments , the sums paid under these heads have the
common feature that they are all payments in respect of works
which have been carried out .
To provide fuller information about certain types of
dangerous occurrence , Section 65 of the Factories Act ,
1937 , requires notification of certain specified
occurrences to H.M. District Inspectors of Factories ,
whether or not they result in injury . Appendix 20
gives figures of dangerous occurrences reported in
1960 ; the types of occurrence which have to be
reported are set out in the heading to the Appendix .
The total number of dangerous occurrences reported
during the year was 1,409 , an increase of 111 over
the total for 1959 . However , the number of
notifiable accidents associated with occurrences fell
from 252 ( 31 of them fatal ) in 1959 to
245 ( 22 fatal ) in 1960 . The main increase in
the numbers of occurrences reported occurred in the
category of those due to the collapse or
failure of a crane , derrick , winch or hoist , where
there was an increase of almost one-third from
335 to 438 .
guard on the jib of the crane , intended to
prevent direct contact with the line , and
electronic equipment with a sensitive probe
mounted slightly forward of the head of the
jib and with electronic assembly
and warning apparatus in the driver's
cab . Improved designs of both forms
are being tried out at present .
There is , however , a danger that workers
will rely too much on fixed devices because
they fail to recognise their limitations .
It is therefore safer both in principle and
practice to keep the worker away from
overhead lines wherever possible , e.g. , by
( 1 ) re-routing the line , ( 2 ) putting the supply
underground , ( 3 ) making the line
dead ( after consultation with the supply
authority ) , ( 4 ) providing barriers at a safe
It is also important to remember that on
from the line may take place without
actual contact . A new type of
machine has recently been developed for
bends . The sheet of leather is placed
on a sliding feed tray outside the
danger zone and is then pushed
forward between two platens , the upper
one carrying a set of small rollers .
The lower platen , which supports the
it into contact with the rollers on the upper
platen , which is then caused to make
several horizontal oscillations so that the
leather is rolled and pressed at the same time .
The danger zone between the platens is fenced
by a guard which is interlocked with the
hydraulic valve and the press is also
starts the machine , the rest of the cycle
following automatically .
developed . In the case of wire-cut bricks
the column of clay from the pug-mill is
carried by a short length of belt
conveyor to the sanding plant .
hopper from which the sand is
distributed to all four faces by a
system of slots , scrapers and worms .
The conveyor is broken at this point to
enable the sand to be applied to
the under surface of the column , which
passes on through two pairs of
table .
Of over 7,000,000 square feet of factory space built by the
development corporations , about 20 per cent represents
extensions built after the firms had become established .
It is the policy of the corporations to charge full rack-
rents or ground rents for their factories or industrial
sites ; and rents vary considerably according to the demand
for factory accommodation .
The average gross return on established industrial estates
ranges from 7 to 9 per cent of the capital expenditure on land ,
site works and buildings . Manufacturing industry affords
employment to large numbers of non-manual as well as
manual workers . An analysis made by Crawley Development
Corporation in 1958 , after collating replies from fifty-eight
manufacturing firms employing over nine thousand staff ,
showed that 5 per cent of the staff were classed as
managerial and administrative , 11 per cent as technical
or employed in research and 19 per cent as clerical .
There is no reason to suppose that this pattern is peculiar to
Crawley . The development corporations have aimed at a varied
pattern of industry , offering a reasonable choice of
employer as well as choice of occupation for men , women and
school-leavers , with due regard to the industries
already established in their towns . Inevitably engineering ,
including the motor vehicle and aircraft industries ,
predominates in all the London new towns since these are
among the industries which have expanded most
during the last ten years in the country generally .
Of those at present employed in manufacturing industry
in the eight London new towns about 40 per cent are
employed in engineering and electrical goods manufacture -
the proportion employed in both these groups combined
varies from about 30 per cent in Welwyn to 85 per cent in
Stevenage and 90 per cent in Hatfield .
These figures are much higher than the national
averages , and may be thought to indicate a
lack of balance in some of the towns . On the other
hand these groups offer fairly varied opportunities of
skilled employment and are highly diversified
as regards products , markets and methods of
manufacture . Consumer goods industries such as the
manufacture of food # and drink , tobacco , clothing
and footwear are under-represented in the new
towns generally though not in Basildon and
Welwyn .
The following table indicates the size of the
firms , some of them occupying more than
one factory , introduced or sponsored by
development corporations in the new towns : The
overall average for the factories sponsored by
development corporations is about 170 employees
per firm , and the average for each of the London
new towns is roughly the same except at Hatfield ,
where it is much lower , and Stevenage , where it
is much higher .
The position at Stevenage is accounted for by
the presence of one firm with 3,700 employees
and two others with over 1,000 employees .
About 32 per cent of all the workers employed
in factories sponsored by the development
corporations are employed by the eleven
largest firms and about 23 per cent by the next
group of firms employing between five
hundred and one thousand workers .
In factories sponsored by the London new town
development corporations the proportion of
female employees , expressed as a percentage
of all employees , varies from 23 per cent in
Welwyn Garden City and 24 per cent in
Hemel Hempstead to 35 per cent in
Basildon and 55 per cent in Hatfield
with an average of about 30 per cent
- rather less than in the country as a whole .
The figures for Corby and Peterlee
( where the prime need so far has
been to provide employment for
women and girls ) are 82 per cent
and 74 per cent respectively .
Shopping provision in the new towns
has generally been based on an
estimated need of about eight
shops for every thousand people ,
this being considered sufficient
to allow for shoppers coming
The figures for Corby and Peterlee ( where the
prime need so far has been to provide employment
for women and girls ) are 82 per cent and
74 per cent respectively . Shopping provision in
the new towns has generally been based on an
estimated need of # about eight shops
for every thousand people , this being
considered sufficient to allow for shoppers
coming into the town from surrounding
areas .
Distribution over the town as
a whole varies , the smaller
towns tending to rely mainly
on the town centres with a
few " pantry " shops in the
neighbourhoods and the larger
ones providing neighbourhood
centres of up to thirty or more
shops at the heart of the
residential areas , as well as
small sub-centres in outlying
Distribution over the town as a whole
varies , the smaller towns tending to rely
mainly on the town centres with a few
" pantry " shops in the neighbourhoods and
the larger ones providing neighbourhood
centres of up to thirty or more shops
at the heart of the residential areas ,
as well as small sub-centres in
outlying districts .
Some development corporations
have sought to attract private
investors by leasing part of the
shopping area to companies
experienced in commercial
development who have undertaken
the building and letting of the
shops . But corporations have generally
found it more satisfactory to build
themselves , leasing the shops
Some development corporations have sought
to attract private investors by leasing part
of the shopping area to companies experienced
in commercial development who have #
undertaken the building and letting of the
shops . But corporations have generally found it
more satisfactory to build themselves , leasing the
shops to traders , with breaks in the lease to
enable rents to be increased in scale with
the rising prosperity of the town .
This control over lettings also
secures a balanced distribution
of the type of shop , to meet the
convenience of shoppers , and a
reasonable degree of economic
security for the individual shopkeeper .
Timing has proved an important
factor in the success of the shops .
To many at the start may not
provide a living for the traders
This control over lettings also secures a
balanced distribution of the type of shop , to
meet the convenience of shoppers , and a reasonable
degree of economic security # for
the individual shopkeeper . Timing has proved an
important factor in the success of the shops . Too
many at the start may not provide a living
for the traders , but too few may result in
failure to attract custom and the habit of
dependence on mobile shops , essential in the
early stages , may be slow to break if carried
The establishment of open markets
in the town centres has helped to
bring custom to the shops and the
initial fears of some of the
shopkeepers that their trade
would suffer have proved un-
founded . Shopping on two levels
has been introduced in a number
of towns and has added to
the interest of the town centre
The establishment of open markets in the
town centres has helped to bring custom
to the shops and the initial fears of some
of the shopkeepers that their trade would
suffer have proved unfounded . Shopping on
two levels has been introduced in a number
of towns and has added to the interest of the
town centre .
All types of trader have been encouraged ,
from the large departmental store to the
small shoe-mender , with banks specially
sited on corners or in separate courts
to avoid breaking into the shopping frontage .
As in the case of factories and industrial
sites , the corporations' policy has been
to charge full commercial rents for
their shops and shopping sites . The
cost of town centre development has
been very high in some cases with ...
All types of trader have been encouraged ,
from the large departmental store to #
the small shoe-mender , with banks specially
sited on corners or in separate courts to avoid
breaking into the shopping frontage . As in the
case of factories and industrial sites , the
corporations' policy has been to charge full commercial
rents for their shops and shopping sites . The
cost of town centre development has been very
high in some cases with large paved areas
and pleasant amenities and decorative features .
The gross return on capital expendi-
ture on town and neighbourhood shopping
centres ranges from 6 to 13 per cent.
It is to their successful industries and
commercial development that the
corporations must look to recoup the
high costs of main sewerage and
drainage , main roads and other special
development expenditure .
These services develop at their own pace
in response to local demand , however ,
and little can be done to stimulate them .
In practice it has not proved possible
as yet to attract " head offices and
administrative and research establishments
including sections of government depart-
ments and other public offices " on the
scale needed " to establish the character
of the town from the outset as one
of diverse and balanced social ...
Except at Hemel Hempstead , large office
organisations have until quite recently shown
little interest in the new towns , probably because of
the difficulty in the early years in recruiting
suitable staff , especially junior staff , locally .
There is evidence of greater interest today ,
with nearly half a million square feet of
office space under construction - almost as
much as the total area so far completed .
This interest is likely to grow as employers become
aware of the advantages of setting up offices in towns
with a young and growing population and excellent
schools and technical colleges . Towards the end of
the year the Minister wrote personally to some two
hundred chairmen of companies with large offices
in central London , drawing their attention to the
opportunities offered by the new towns .
The development corporations have provided office
accommodation ( in addition to that included in factory
premises ) in the form of buildings specially designed to meet
the needs of particular organisations , and have also
erected some buildings as a speculative venture .
Despite some misgivings , these have readily let on satis-
factory terms , including in many cases a break clause in
the lease allowing for a future increase in rent to reflect
rising values in the town .
The development corporations have provided office
accommodation ( in addition to that included in
factory premises ) in the form of buildings specially
designed to meet the needs of particular organisations ,
and have also erected some buildings as a
speculative venture . Despite some misgivings , these
have readily let on satisfactory terms , including
in many cases a break clause in the lease allowing
for a future increase in rent to reflect rising
values in the town .
More modest premises are provided on the upper floors over
shops in some of the town centres for the small type of
office organisation . Government departments with branches
established or about to be established in the new towns include
Her Majesty's Stationery Office at Basildon , the Meteorological
Office at Bracknell , the Admiralty ( who have a research labora-
tory at Harlow ) , the General Post Office and the Ministry of
Transport at Hemel Hempstead and the Department of Scien-
tific and Industrial Research at Stevenage .
More modest premises are provided on the upper
floors over shops in some of the town centres for
the small type of office organisation . Government
departments with branches established or about
to be established in the new towns include Her
Majesty's Stationery Office at Basildon , the
Meteorological Office at Bracknell , the Admiralty
( who have a research laboratory at Harlow ) , the
General Post Office and the Ministry of Transport
at Hemel Hempstead and the Department of
Local offices of the Ministry of Labour , Ministry of National
Insurance and Inland Revenue are of course established or
proposed in all the towns . Because of the abnormal age structure
of the new town populations the number of children reaching
school-leaving age , expressed as a percentage of the
total population , has been and still is below the
national average .
Local offices of the Ministry of Labour , Ministry of
National Insurance and Inland Revenue are of course
established or proposed in all the towns . Because
of the abnormal age structure of the new town
populations the number of children reaching
school-leaving age , expressed as a percentage of the
total population , has been and still is below the
national average .
But whereas the national annual average will
settle down at something like 1.4 per
cent after the " bulge " has passed , in the
new towns the percentage will generally go
on rising ( in some towns into the middle
seventies ) reaching levels of perhaps 2.3 per
cent in some towns before it begins to
decline .
But whereas the national annual average will settle
down at something like 1.4 per cent after the
" bulge " has passed , in the new towns the percentage
will generally go on rising ( in some towns into the
middle seventies ) reaching levels of perhaps 2.3
per cent in some towns before it begins to decline .
During this period , when large numbers of school-
leavers will be looking for jobs , there
will be relatively few retirements . For the most
part therefore local employment can
be provided only by the expansion of existing
industry and the introduction of new factories ,
laboratories and offices , and the expected but
not easily stimulated development of the service
industries . Schemes for training young people in
industry and commerce will be particularly important in
During this period , when large numbers of school-
leavers will be looking for jobs , there will be
relatively few retirements . For the most part therefore
local employment can be provided only by the
expansion of existing industry and the introduction
of new factories , laboratories and offices , and
the expected but not easily stimulated development
of the service industries . Schemes for training
young people in industry and commerce will
be particularly important in the new towns .
As the Reith Committee foresaw , " perfect synchronisation
of the movement of employing firms with the
movement of employed people is not practicable " .
For short periods over the years some of the
London new town corporations have been able to
offer a house or a flat at once to anyone
eligible for one , but in the main house
building has lagged behind the demand .
movement of employed people is not practicable " .
but in the main house building has lagged
behind the demand .
At the present time in most of the towns
the waiting period has tended to grow , partly
because the buoyancy of industry generates
increasing demands , partly because in
recent years the pressure on the building
industry , the shortage of bricks and other
materials , and the shortage of skilled labour ,
especially in the finishing trades , has made
it difficult for corporations to achieve
their full programme .
period has tended to grow , partly because
on the building industry , the shortage of bricks
and other materials , and the shortage of
their full programme .
It is believed that about 60 per cent of the
employees of London firms transferring their
business to the new towns moved with them and
were thus eligible to rent a corporation house .
Additional workers are recruited through the
industrial selection scheme by arrangement
with the Ministry of Labour . This scheme is
designed to ensure that vacancies in the
London new towns which cannot be filled
locally are filled as far as possible from people
moved with them and were thus eligible to rent #
houses . As a result , almost 80 per cent of the #
London new towns have gone to Londoners , about
half of whom are known to have been on local
authority housing lists .
Tables C , D and E of Appendix 16 give details of
factories , shops and offices completed and under
construction at the end of the year .
Unless it is known at what oxygen potential a given
material in the sodium coolant circuit will start to
oxidise the cell can only be used as has been
suggested above , as an oxygen concentration monitor .
However , if a material oxidizes in sodium at a given
oxygen potential the reference electrode could be held
at that potential and oxidizing or reducing conditions
in the coolant circuit for that material would be
indicated by a negative or positive potential at the
reference electrode .
Thus for the specific case of niobium in a sodium
circuit a corrosion indicator could be a reference
electrode of sodium saturated and equilibrated
with niobium separated from the coolant by a
solid anionic electrolyte . A negative voltage from
the reference electrode would mean oxidizing
conditions for niobium and positive voltage , non-
oxidizing conditions . The practical application of
the above idea will involve considerable experimenta-
tion before it can be realised .
The first requirement is for an anionic
electrolyte , which can be fabricated into
suitable shapes impervious to gases and
liquid sodium and which is neither
corroded by sodium nor by sodium
monoxide . Possible materials are zirconia
stabilised with lime and thoria doped
with rare earth oxides .
Provided the temperatures at C and E are
the same , thermoelectric contributions to the
voltage should be zero . The probe extends
out of the sodium stream through a close
fitting thin walled T-Junction F and passes
into the open via a water-cooled O ring seal G .
The open end of the probe is sealed with
a vacuum coupling H which also positions
the +ve nickel conductor with respect
to the sodium by circlips on either side
of the seal I .
Evaporation of sodium from the pool C is
minimised by a close fitting cylindrical
block of electrolyte J attached to the +ve nickel
conductor by nickel circlips . Fixing and
positioning of the probe relative to the coolant
stream is effected by tie-bars of insulating
material K joining the vacuum coupling H to the
water cooled flange G .
The probe can be evacuated and filled with inert gas
via the tube L which must of course be electrically
isolated after this has been carried out . It is not
suggested that the above proposal will be successful
but rather that it is worth a trial in the event of
the inadequacy of some simpler method of
monitoring the oxygen in a sodium circuit . The
principal difficulty encountered by the author , in
determining partial molal free energies by solid
electrolyte cells of very stable oxides such as UO2 ,
MnO etc. was vapour phase transfer of oxygen by
carbonaceous impurities in the blanket gas .
-ve electrode and reduction of the +ve
electrode which of course led to a loss in
another so that this major source of
trouble should not be present .
The presence of 75 of bismuth-210 is equivalent to
ingrowth over two half-lives ( ten days ) . Therefore
after a further forty days , the bismuth daughter
will be within 0.1 sources are required for use sooner
than forty or fifty days after preparation , the
lead-210 together with added lead carrier must
be separated from the bismuth-210 daughter by
ion exchange ( see Analytical Method , steps 4 , 5 )
before precipitating lead chromate .
Knowing the time of separation and the
activity of the lead-210 solution , the ingrowth
of the bismuth-210 can be calculated . The
absolute activity of the reference standards
can be calculated from the known activity
of the lead-210 solution and the chemical
yield , but this calculation is unnecessary
provided the same lead carrier solution is
used to prepare the reference standards
and for the analyses .
Only the weights of the recovered lead chromate
precipitates need be known because the concentration
of the lead carrier solution cancels out of the
algebraic equations . An effort was made to
detect the presence of any radioactive impurities in
the tracer by separating the lead-210 and the
bismuth-210 by anion exchange . The 15b-counting
of the lead-210 fraction began within a few
minutes of completing the separation .
The ingrowth of bismuth-210 was followed
for ten days and showed no abnormalities .
Any impurity in the lead fraction must ha-
ve been well below one percent . Some separa-
ted lead-210 was used to make reference stan-
dards and as a tracer in recovery experiments .
There was no significant difference between the-
se results and those obtained using the original
lead-210 solution supplied by the Radiochemical
Centre which we concluded was radiochemi-
cally pure .
Rosenquist ( 4 ) showed that minute quantities of
lead can be isolated from large volumes of solu-
tion by coprecipitating the lead with a strontium
sulphate . Lead and strontium form mixed cry-
stals so that the more insoluble lead sulphate
is almost completely recovered even if precipitation
of the strontium sulphate is incomplete . Using
ten milligrams of lead carrier and six
hundred milligrams of strontium per liter ,
more than 95 experiment .
Absorption of the beta particles is also kept to a
minimum but the accuracy and precision of
weighing the precipitated sources suffers . All
precipitates were weighed on a semi-micro balance
which had been calibrated with a set of certificated
weights from the National Physical Laboratory .
Complete chemical exchange between the
radio-lead and the added lead carrier is
necessary if the analytical results are to
be correct .
In the preliminary experiments , the tracer was added to a
liter of effluent and immediately coprecipitated with
strontium sulphate from hot solution . Chemical exchange
was complete under these conditions ; but when the tracer
was added to alkaline effluent and allowed to
stand for several days before the addition of lead
carrier , the recovery of lead-210 was as much as five
per cent low when corrected for gravimetric recovery
of the carrier .
The presence and growth of algae in the
alkaline effluent does not prevent the
recovery of radio-lead under the prescribed
conditions although some radioactivity remains
on the algae until the metathesis has been
completed by heating the mixed sulphates
with three separate portions of dilute ( 1.25
normal ) sodium carbonate solution . The
strength of the carbonate solution was
chosen after experiments with lead tracer
alone which indicated that less lead was
A small manual coffee grinder is useful as the resin
cannot be ground with a mortar and pestle . The
sieved resin is washed repeatedly with distilled water
to remove fines and then with hydrochloric acid to
convert the resin completely to the chloride form .
The 60-100 mesh resin is again washed with water to
remove the acid and finally dried in air .
The glass tube is 11 cm. long and 1 cm. in internal
diameter . One end of the tube is drawn down to a fine
tip and a B14 conical glass socket is fitted to the
other end as shown in Figure 1 . The reservoir is a 50 ml
cylindrical separating funnel with a capillary tap
modified by the addition of a B14 cone to fit the
glass column .
The exact volume of the eluting agents must be found by
experiment for each batch of resin using radioactive tracer
( lead-210 , bismuth-210 ) . A typical elution curve is shown in
Figure 3 . Once these volumes have been established , the weight
of resin used is also fixed . All available evidence indicates
that the fractions containing lead and bismuth are free
of cross contamination apart from the natural
ingrowth of the daughters arising from the decay of
lead .
Polonium-210 remains on the column and does not
interfere . Strontium does not form a chloro-complex
and therefore passes through in the feed solution and
the first wash . The resin is used for a single
separation and then thrown away . In the first stage
of the analysis , only the fraction containing
lead-210 is collected . The lead is precipitated as
the chromate , washed , slurried onto an aluminium
counting tray , dried under an infra-red lamp ,
weighed , and set aside for five days while the
bismuth-210 grows in .
At the end of five days , bismuth-210 will have
reached one-half of its equilibrium value and
can be counted through an aluminium absorber
sufficiently thick to stop the beta particles
from lead-210 and the alpha particles from
polonium-210 .
During the first few hours the curve will be
distorted if activity other than bismuth-
210 is present . These bismuth nuclides may
include : together with their lead parents .
All but lead-212 will decay completely
within six hours . The decay of lead-212
will distort the observed activity for
hour and a half days if it is
present .
If there is sufficient beta activity , the radioche-
mical purity of the Bi-210 may be checked
by observing the decay curve . The removal of lead
chromate from the aluminium counting tray together
with the bismuth-210 prior to the second ion
exchange separation has been checked by
counting the trays . Not more than 0.2 of the
bismuth-210 remains on the tray after the
acid wash .
This loss is acceptably small for an analytical
step when no correction for carrier
recovery is possible . The completeness
of the chemical exchange between the
bismuth-210 and the added carrier was
also tested . Two samples of precipitated
lead chromate ( lead-210 , bismuth-210 )
were counted and dissolved in nitric
acid in silica basins . The contents
were evaporated to dryness with
bismuth carrier and then taken up in
The bismuth was recovered from the eluate as the
phosphate . Results did not differ from those obtained by the more
convenient method of heating the dissolved chro-
mates in 2 N hydrochloric acid for fifteen minutes . The more
rigorous method of securing chemical exchange was unnecessary .
Lead-210 when present in effluent is likely to be found
only at very low concentrations .
Table 1 shows the decontamination factors
obtained experimentally for ten radionuclides ,
accompanied in two instances by radioactive dau-
ghters . The decontamination factor falls below
104 only for Ruthenium-106 and zirconium-95
with their daughters in the first stage , i.e.
the lead chromate source containing the bismuth-
21 daughter . When the second stage ( the bismuth
phosphate source ) is completed , the decontami-
nation factors are exceptionally high .
A known quantity ( approx. 1 x 10-2 15mc ) of
lead-210 was added to 1-litre aliquots
of different batches of typical low-activity
effluent . The aliquots were allowed to
stand for about seven days ( except
where noted to the contrary ) before lead
carrier was added and the analytical
procedure begun .
seem to migrate on some occasions while
any stage may not on others . Such data
cannot yet be rationalized . Where
information is less extensive , however , it is
possible to find some regularity in the
observations . Thus in Euphausia superba
from the Antarctic , the metanauplii remain
in deep water , the later larval stages
migrate diurnally , and the adolescents
stay permanently at the surface .
meters , and the time of their arrival at
the surface is directly related to their
swimming capacity : 3rd ( oldest )
calyptopis from 1800-2200 hr ; 2nd ,
Similar ontogenetic differences are apparent
in Bosmina coregoni whose adults remain
at the surface while the young migrate
to and from a depth of 50 meters .
Such permanent occurrence at the surface
could of course be considered the extreme
of a variable day depth . The effect of
day depths upon the surfacing of various
animals has been reviewed elsewhere . c .
Anomalies . In spite of the variability
of migrational behavior , some kinds
of anomalies may be recognized .
Vertical movement occurs in some forms
apparently in the reverse manner to
Such reversed migrations are known for
Acartia clausi , A. longiremis , Nyctiphanes
couchii , Evadne sp. , Oithona nana , Daphnia
lumholzi , Stages 4 , 5 , and adult of
Calanus finmarchicus , Diaptomus banforanus ,
and Cyclops bicuspidatus . An echo-producing
layer , which the authors think probably consists
of euphausiids , has also been described
as , in part , regularly moving in a reverse
manner . Most of these records are well
substantiated and involve whole populations
rather than aberrant individuals .
But normal movements have been
reported also for the same species in
the case of five of these examples
and for other species in the same
Daphnia , and Diaptomus . Many
occasions do not , but a few
appear to remain permanently at
is that of the copepod Anomalocera
frigida , and Centropages typicus are
The predaceous cladoceran Bythotrephes
level , about 10 meters down .
In view of its well-known normal
migration , the occurrence of Calanus
finmarchicus in the summer at
the surface in bright sunlight
may justly be considered anomalous .
This phenomenon has nevertheless been
recorded many times , and such
surface Calanus may be present in
into small circular ripples like
It seems likely that a continuous
the population at the surface and
that in deeper water . A second
group whose normal vertical
known to make daytime
occurrence at the surface
rank as anomalous is the
Euphausiacea . There are numerous
although passive movement through
various grounds . For example ,
transport in vertical currents
erences in water viscosity after
temperature changes have also been
Downward movement may in some forms
when it occurs before dawn ; but this
must almost certainly be replaced
primary dependence of diurnal
is beyond doubt . Yet in spite
of a great amount of work ,
but combined its influence with that
Rose , have proposed that light
alone can provide an adequate
mechanism if the animals have ,
and select by exploration , a
This view has been enlarged
This resulted in units of much lighter weight than could be
obtained with tubular constructions . The growth of the
aircraft industry brought even greater emphasis to the need
for lightweight compact heat exchangers . During the 1930's ,
the secondary surface plate-and-corrugation construction
became established for aero-engine radiators , using
dip-soldered copper . The air and engine-coolant passages
were separated by flat plates .
The air passages were packed with corrugated
foil bonded to the primary plates to
provide the necessary surface area for heat transfer .
The narrower coolant passages were also packed with foil ,
for aircraft heat exchangers and led to substantial
This development coincided with the introduction of
pressurized aircraft cabins and the demand for air-to-air
cabin coolers . Although in this case the heat transfer
coefficients on the two sides of the heat exchanger
were of comparable magnitude , the use of
secondary surface was still attractive , since the
greater part of the surface area could be made up
of fins only 0.006 in. ( 0.15 mm. ) thick .
Furthermore , developments in the detail form of
the fins made possible a reduction in the total
surface area required as compared with the use of
smooth continuous passages for the same thermal
duty and pressure losses . The properties of
compact form , low weight , and design flexibility
thus developed found ready application on a
much larger scale with the introduction of tonnage
scale air separation plants .
The basic method of construction is both simple and
extremely flexible . Figure 3 illustrates the
arrangement of a single passage . This can be
extended in length and width up to the limit of
manufacturing equipment available . The corrugation
is machine-formed , thus ensuring a high standard
of uniformity in height and fin pitch .
Though that was not quite the phrase , for even
if he could succeed Sir Charles he would , as
an executive , be eternally differentiated from
the Governors . Fairbanks managed the Governors
beautifully , he knew more than they , he was
cleverer than most , discreetly used their Christian
names - but remained their servant . They had
no office hours , however elastic ; their lives were
spent in committee making decisions for others
to execute on the basis of data laboriously
The gin pahits , and now the beer with the
curry , had their desired effect on us ;
or rather , on Nigel and myself . Lee , I
noticed , had asked for Coca-Cola . This
rather surprised me from a young man
who was otherwise so sophisticated . He
was not , however , ostentatious about
the matter .
If anything , he had merely become a little more reserved , and
much more polite . I thought to myself : ' A few years in the
East , my boy , and you 'll drink - I 've seen your kind be-
fore ! ' After the curry , I wanted only to go upstairs to
bed . I had long since become accustomed , and now addicted ,
to an after-curry nap .
Verena Holenstein
Lee , however , showed not the slightest sign of fatigue . ' I
wonder if you 'd mind if I took a bit of a look round , '
he asked Nigel . ' I don't sleep in the afternoons . ' Nigel ,
I must say , was very good about it . I knew how much
he probably wanted to sleep himself . But , almost
gallantly , he said :
' Not at all . I 'll show you . ' ' Oh no , '
young Lee protested , considerate as always .
' That 's not necessary if you want to rest , sir .
I 'm sure I won't do any harm . ' Nigel
laughed . I had not known he was so
good-natured . But then , I suppose I had
never given him similar cause to display
such amiability .
I slept soundly , and much later than I should . It
was already after six when I awoke , and the sun
was nearly setting beyond the west window .
Downstairs I could hear the murmur of voices ,
and knew they were back . I wondered , as I
wrapped a 6sarong around my waist , if
Nigel at all resented being deprived of his
afternoon sleep .
And I said to myself : Oh , God , doesn't the
boy ever relax ! He turned his gaze away
nakedness of the upper half of my body , even
of the social graces ; but , naturally , he said
not so much as a word about it .
' We 've just had tea , ' Nigel said . ' Would you like
the cookie to make you a fresh lot ? ' ' I 'd rather
have whisky , ' I told him . ' Thought as much .
Sun 's nearly below the yard-arm , anyway .
Wouldn't mind a stengah myself . How about
you , Harry ? ' So they had managed to come
to the stage of using each other's Christian
names , I noted .
Perhaps Lee wasn't quite as
reserved as I thought . ' Thanks ,
Nigel , ' he said . ' Just Coca-Cola .
Although I 'd like to have
whatever you have . I want to
get to know the kind of life
people lead in the East , you know . '
At this , I felt a return of the
irritation I felt with him
at times .
Knowing Nigel , I would have been surprised if he
had not made his usual ' arrangements ' . A bachelor
himself , he knew well how to entertain his bachelor
friends . He caught my look and pursed his lips in
a quick little grimace of acknowledgement ; then raised
an enquiring eyebrow in young Lee's direction .
I shrugged a shoulder . Lee would have
to decide about that for himself , I
thought , and noticed that although he
was looking at the other girl , he did
so quite dispassionately , almost as though
he was merely interested in the unfamiliar
clothes she was wearing . And I thought
to myself : He may be still too much of
a ' new chum ' to see ' the beauty of
the East ' .
There was still an ease in our conversation , but its
scope was restricted . I felt that I could hardly make the
usual enquiries and comments about Nigel's various mistresses
as I was accustomed to whenever I saw him , much as I
wondered which of his girls was in favour at the moment .
And I suppose he felt the same . We had only a few drinks ,
then decided to bathe and dress for a rather early
dinner .
He had one of the better Kashmir carpets on
the floor . His pictures and curtains , indeed I
suppose the entire furnishings , had been se-
lected personally . The house was , as he
occasionally proclaimed , his home - and he had
made it as such . I doubt if he will ever
leave Malaya , even when he retires .
The country , and his mistresses , have come
to mean too much to him . And , indirectly ,
it - before , for me too , it would be too late .
morning to retire as soon as it seemed
prudent to do so , after the coffee and brandy ,
awaiting me .
After lunch two of the Prime Minister's
grandchildren who had sat , rather intimidated
by Ormston and staring at the Grinling
Gibbons carving around the fireplace , rose
gratefully from the table , leaving the two
men together . A nurse came in , and asked
the Prime Minister if he wanted to be
helped out on to the lawn , but he waved
her away impatiently .
I don't mean just our direct military costs . I 'm
thinking of the African Boycott which is already working up .
I 'm afraid , Prime Minister , you 're not going to like the
trading position when you see it . ' ' I never do , ' the
Prime Minister commented wearily . The Chancellor
was repeating an argument which he had already
developed for an hour before lunch .
' It comes at a bad time , ' said
Ormston . ' A singularly bad time . The
Party 's very restless , you know . ' ' It
' The younger ones like Gore , Vaughan ,
Hadley , Prebble , Lambert-Price - the
New Africa lot - ' ' Do they confide
' Only at yesterday's meeting - they 're very restless , Prime
Minister . They feel that it 's very old-fashioned - shooting
down mobs of natives . They 're very much afraid that
if the Opposition get a Commission of Enquiry some
rather dismal stuff is going to come out . '
' Young back-benchers are always restive when they 're
bored , ' said the Prime Minister , and for the first
time since his grandchildren left the table , he smiled .
' Why don't you give them something to play with ? '
The Prime Minister continued in his flippant
tone , ' Tell the Chief to give them a
talking-to . ' The Chancellor closed his eyes ,
and then said ,
' I think it 's gone beyond that , Prime Minister .
disturbed by the new and rather ugly image of
the Party which our African policy is creating .
On the whole , the country is still in favour
of moderation and common sense . Melville has
in a curious way made us look old-fashioned
- extravagant - nineteenth centuryish -
almost cranky . '
The Prime Minister looked puzzled , and said , ' Julia Drayford ? How
what .
As he turned aside his head , since he could not
bear to look at her beautiful , pleading face , he was
suddenly attacked by suspicion . ' You wish to marry
someone else ! ' he cried in a voice roughened by
jealousy . She sighed deeply , and looked away . ' Do you ?
Do you ? ' he repeated , fiercely .
' If , ' she said gently , giving him a look that set his pulses throbbing ,
' if I wished to marry some young gallant , do you think I would
and confusion at the end of the room . Prince Doria had
wearied of his toy and was packing it away in its painted
coffer .
The party was now preparing to see
the tapestries , and in the general
movement , Vittoria was separated from
Orsini . Although neither of them
wished to follow the sightseers , there seemed
no alternative . As she was about to mount
a wide and shallow flight of marble
stairs , she became aware of someone
watching her intently , and turning
in that direction , she saw Olimpia ,
standing beside her admirer , Orlando Cavalcanti .
The young man was bending over her with the
assiduity of a lover , but the girl appeared to be more
interested in her cousin's wife , whom she was regarding
through half-closed eyes . This was a slight shock to
Vittoria , who had forgotten the existence of the girl ,
and , up to this moment had been unaware of the
young man's presence at the palazzo .
' Are you enjoying yourself , Olimpia ? ' she
asked idly , tapping the girl's cheek lightly with
her fan , in passing ; but she did not wait for
the answer . Disturbed by vague uneasiness , she
was wondering whether Olimpia had been
watching her talk with Orsini . Surely she
could not have overheard anything they
said ? A moment's reflection reassured her
on that point , for she was certain no one
had been standing near them .
However , something inimical in the girl's look
put Vittoria on guard . ' Santa Maria ! These spying
eyes ! ' she thought , bitterly . Doria was continually
stopping on the way , to point out , with childish pride ,
objects of beauty or interest . Vittoria , on the
fringe of the party , caught snatches of this
information , which held no interest for her :
' ... now this sapphire ...
I like to think it may have fallen from the dark
hair of the Empress Messalina , as she crouched
in terror in the gardens of Lucullus , awaiting the
sword of the executioner . ' ' Ah ! ' exclaimed
Farnese , with a snigger . ' The old cuckold
Claudius had the last word , after all . He
knew how to deal with an adulterous wife ,
eh , Orsini ? '
If the duke made any reply to this , Vittoria did
not hear it . Now they entered the long gallery
where they dispersed and wandered around , admiring
and commenting on the glowing hues and barbaric
splendours of the tapestries Doria had brought
back from Lepanto . After a short interval , Orsini
found an opportunity to rejoin Vittoria .
' We must talk further , ' he said in a low
urgent voice . ' Where ? '
' Be careful , ' she whispered from behind her fan .
' Olimpia is watching us . The young man with her is
Orlando Cavalcanti , Francesco's friend . ' Orsini
shot an impatient glance at the couple . ' The young man
with the mole ? ' ' Yes , indeed . ' ' No matter . They are not
looking at us . Now I must know , ' he whispered , ' what
you meant , cara mia . Do you want your freedom in order
to marry ? '
Before replying to this , she glanced
hastily around , then spoke in tones so low that he
had to bend his head to hear : ' I will never be
any man's mistress . As to marrying again ...
if I were free ... there is only one man I would
wish to marry ... but ... he , like myself , is now
bound . '
With a swift gesture she closed her fan
and moved away from him towards the group
in the centre of the gallery , leaving him standing
alone , against that glowing , barbaric background ,
with a deeply thoughtful expression on his face .
On a bright unclouded morning a few days after
the visit to the Doria Palace , the cardinal's
coach left the villa , lurched over the unpaved
track and turned towards the ruined Baths
of Diocletian .
Vittoria , accompanied by her maid , Lucia , was on her
way to the Accoramboni villa , ostensibly to pay
a daughterly call on her father , actually to coax
money from that indulgent parent to settle her mounting
debts . Lucia was thinking how beautiful her mistress
looked , and how cunningly the olive-green dress
with its underskirt of rose-brocade fitted her
perfect figure . Vittoria's thoughts were more complex .
The sparkling society of the Doria Palace , the flattery
of Orsini's obsession , the thwarted ambitions of her
restless spirit , all threw into sharp relief the contrast
of her grey life with the splendid one that filled
her dreams . At the Villa Montalto she felt an alien ,
pleaded his financial dependence on his uncle , who
had built the villa for his family .
He reminded her that they must abide by Roman
custom , and dwell there with their relations . Her
values were those of the materialist who assesses
every human being in terms of fame , power and
wealth . Francesco she despised for his dullness , his
lack of initiative , his subservience to his uncle .
Her husband's gentleness and amiability , his unselfish
love for her , she regarded as signs of weakness . He was a
futile creature who had not even proved capable of giving
her a child . Whatever passion she had experienced in the
first months of marriage had been ousted by contempt .
She had never loved him . Her thoughts rushed to Orsini .
Since the meeting in the Doria Palace , no word had
come from him , and this silence oppressed her spirits
with a weight of misgiving .
She had , perhaps , demanded too much . The
kiss in the garden had plumbed unsus-
pected depths in her , and she knew that
Prudence , ambition and reason had
held instinct in check , and they must
dictate her course . There could be no
compromise . For a brief interval
she allowed herself the luxury of
Bracciano , the balls and fe*?5tes , the
This reverie was rudely ended as the coach gave a
sickening jolt and came to an abrupt stop , nearly throwing
the two girls from their seats . Lucia uttered a cry of
alarm . ' Look , madonna , we are surrounded ! ' It was true .
Men armed with pikes and daggers swarmed about
them and a lean , swarthy fellow was peering through
the window , grinning impudently . ' Santa Maria ! '
shrieked Lucia . ' Banditti ! '
Vittoria now realized that they were outside
Santa Maria degli Angeli , and that except for a few beggars
crouching in the doorway of the church and exhibiting
loathsome sores , the area was deserted . ' They are not banditti ,
Lucia , ' said Vittoria , pointing to the badge on the man's
shoulder . The words were clear . ' Beware my hug ! ' Lucia
stared speechlessly at the golden bear ; Vittoria swiftly
averted her head to avoid the impertinent glance
of the retainer .
Her thoughts at this moment were chaotic . The
coach now turned in another direction , towards
the wild and desolate region behind the baths .
It was sparsely inhabited , dotted with fallow fields
and terraced vineyards , and here and there jutted
a brown outcrop of flower-wreathed ruins , a pathetic
reminder of Rome's former greatness .
In this region of Monti most of the public baths
had been built in the time of the Caesars , but with the
breaking of the aqueducts during the barbarian invasions
the baths had lost their purpose ; they had become
stone quarries and their precious marble had been
burnt for lime . Now escaped criminals and bandits
used these quarries as hiding places , to the danger
of travellers in the district .
As they lumbered past at a rattling pace , Vittoria
could see a wisp of smoke curling above the fire of a
gypsy encampment and a few tatterdemalion creatures
gathered about it , cooking their frugal meal . These
were left far behind . An old man belabouring an
overladen donkey , and a withered crone appeared
on the horizon , were overtaken and forgotten .
Except for their escort , Vittoria and
Lucia might have been the only living
creatures on an empty planet . After the
initial shock , Vittoria felt calm . She
knew exactly what she wanted , and
was prepared to take it without scruple ,
if she could . What she had forgotten
in her self-absorption in her own schemes
in their schemes , which were likely to
run counter to her own .
This move today was a reminder of that fact .
Whilst she automatically patted the hand of
the agitated Lucia , her brain was working
rapidly , and she decided that she must be
prepared to counter Orsini's demands ,
difficult though that would be . She became
aware that the pace was slackening ;
now the coach stopped .
The moment had come . Upon the ensuing interview
the future would depend . Outwardly she was calm , but
her heart was beating fast , and the palms of her
hands were damp . Orsini's high-crowned hat with
its jaunty plume blotted out the light ; his hand
was on the door . Glancing at Lucia he said in
French to Vittoria : ' Your maid ... is she reliable ? '
' I see . I know how to deal with people like that , '
law in Rome . '
their arms were wrenched from their sockets . ' You have
heard of it ?
The Orsini give that to traitors . There is
no escaping the vengeance of an Orsini . We hunt
a traitor down to the ends of the earth , and no
power can save him ... or her . Do you understand ? '
' Yes , signor , ' she faltered . ' On the other hand , ' he
continued , giving her a keen look , ' the Orsini are
generous to those who serve them faithfully .
Remember that , my girl . ' Lucia was beyond
speech . He turned to Vittoria , sitting erect ,
with flushed cheeks and eyes sparkling with
anger . ' And now , madonna , ' he said smoothly , ' we will
continue the conversation started at the Doria
Palace . Be pleased to alight . ' ' I think , ' she replied
coolly , ' I prefer to stay where I am . '
maid , ' she said coldly to Orsini .
' She is absolutely safe , ' he replied ; but he turned ,
away into a tiny valley beyond which , on the crest
of a wooded hill-side , the ruins of a small temple
were etched against the clear blue of the sky .
He forgot time and place . He , the master , was gently
led along erotic paths which he knew existed , but
had never trodden . He learned how to use his
hands , how to adore that body without haste , how
to caress every inch with his mouth as well , to
creep down along her smooth muscles till he lost
himself in a rapture of kisses in places he 'd
dreamed of , where life began to ooze and quickened
his heart beat to a thunder .
He looked at her . Head thrown back in a pool of hair ,
her blood-red lips parted and the beating of her
heart in the full throat . Her mouth did things he
thought no human being could stand without
dying , but he went on living in an ocean of
voluptuousness , that swelled and ebbed over him ,
under him , in him and through him ...
He was having a ball ! He twiddled the TV set with
shaking hands . She sat calmly on the bed smoking
a cigarette . His face was white with two red
blotches . Hers was flushed and lovely . O.K. teacher !
Was that any better ? You know it was ! You don't
need teaching , only a little coaxing .
He sat down and ran his finger down along her
spine . Do you love me now ? Like yesterday ! I 'm
extremely fond of you . The fact that you 're beginning
to satisfy my physical wants does not change that .
Before long you 'll give me the satisfaction that 'll set
me rocking on my feet , but I 'll still be only fond of
you . But you wouldn't marry me ?
No . I 'm not your type . I 'd make you miserable . I
mean that . I 'd very probably be unfaithful and
that 'd kill you . Then I 'd be unfaithful too , to teach
you a lesson . It wouldn't work . You 'd do it to
spite me . I would never do it for that reason .
To me it 'd be immaterial whether you 'd retaliate
or not . You 'd go crazy if that situation arose .
To observe the colour rise in her cheek
and hear her breath come faster , to see
the slight beads of sweat come out on
her glistening skin and see her move
with uncontrolled rhythm . To have her twist
in an attempt to receive a caress he was
purposely withholding , to hear her deep-throated
moan of full satisfaction and feel her
shivering , clawing surrender .
Not so dusty , she might say afterwards , drawing at
a cigarette . It 's a wow ! he said . She kissed
him motherly : You just wait till you teach the
girl you really love . He didn't protest any more
to say he loved her because he knew it to
be untrue . Instead he said : Will that be
better ? She nodded :
It 's man's nature to teach and to teach those
we love is double pleasure . And she
might add : And don't forget to leave the
lights on . You lose half the fun when you
fumble in the dark . She had many direct
comments like that . Once she quietly
pushed him back when he kissed her too
fully and too soon :
Oi , not yet , you oaf . What do you think my
mouth is ? A billposter's bucket to be
plunged in at random ? He 'd learned to
laugh when something went wrong or the
situation became ludicrous , as when they
were both caught in the raw when he 'd
forgotten to lock his door and Derek
had walked in unexpectedly .
They 'd just had time to nip into the
bathroom and stood there shivering for
fifteen minutes while their guest was
smoking a cigarette waiting for him .
At last Derek got tired and left .
Just in time , erupted Charlie . If he 'd
stayed any longer I 'd jolly well
have asked him to join us . I 'm so
darned cold I could do with two men .
You perverted sex-maniac , you wouldn't
dare . Show me what you can do and
I 'll tell you if you need help .
Once he came back to the subject
of her marriage and asked her why
she was going to marry her sculptor .
Because I love him , of course .
What do you think ?
But he 's a lot older , isn't he ?
I suppose so . What attracts you ?
It can't be physical ? Of course
not ! I love him for what he is
- he 's so great I 'm a bit scared
of him - a woman must be a bit
scared to be really in love .
That 's why you could never
love me ?
Correct , ducky ! You just wait till
you meet the girl who thinks you 're a
god . It 'll make you feel like one !
You think that sculptor 's a god ?
Perhaps , in a way . All I know is
that I need him . He kissed the
heart beat in her throat . But how
about the physical side ? You 're
quite an erotic little beast ; can
he satisfy that ?
You youngsters always overestimate
yourselves . You can take it from
me that he can and does . But
even if he were impotent I 'd still
love and want him . There are
sides to me you 'll never know .
Don't you feel guilty living with
me ? Often ! Don't you ? Mary had
married her bill broker some time
ago and he now shuddered when he
remembered the clinical weekends
he used to spend with her .
He often used to try to imagine
her reactions if he had once treated
her as he did Charlie , but his
imagination failed . The efficient
little Mary would probably have
called it a shocking waste of time
and told him to get down to
business ! Charlie , who was perfectly
at home at all sorts of artistic
circles , had amongst others wangled
him a membership ticket for a
small club for artists only .
it could have been . She showed
One of the small ones . Sark , that 's it . The Caxtons
used to have their holidays there . Starmouth went
there . He dug out some people who remembered
the family . In the end he pieced it all together .
The Caxtons had two boys - Michael and Derek .
Pete first met them at school .
It was a good school I sent him to , one of the best .
He was a boarder . He could always turn on the
charm when it suited him . The whole family
came to like him . The real Michael - he was the
same age as my son - died of pleurisy when he
was eighteen . Soon after that Pete staged his
drowning .
He was always a smooth liar . He invented some
plausible story or other and threw himself on
the Caxtons' generosity . They accepted him as a
kind of substitute for the boy they had lost .
Outside the family he began to pass himself
off as Michael Caxton . The father was well-off
and easy-going . He was easy meat for Pete .
He sponged off him until he died
just after the war . Then Pete had to
look around for some other
and Dackson's daughter . Mrs. Caxton's
to fade . At times she thought Pete was
really her own son .
My chance had come at last . I had to
take it . I was going to smash him as
he had twice tried to smash me . ( His
eyes , wild and frightened , were fixed on
Tong . Tong guessed that they did not
see him . ) I told Starmouth to go at
once and report exactly what he had
seen to Dackson and his daughter .
He did as he was told .
Carol Carstairs , interviewed by
Passon and Tong for the second time ,
began by agreeing that she could
have been mistaken about the
precise minute of Dackson's visit
the previous Wednesday , and ended
at least half an hour late for
his appointment with her . " There
it is , " Passon commented
woman .
" Another was the body fetching up on the mooring-hook - practically where
it started from . " " And you finding out about the spy at the Marshams' ,
" Passon said . " Just a stroke of luck , sir , " Tong said . " Luck or not ,
Harry , it was the real turning-point for us . Must be true what they
say . ' Tong can't go wrong ! ' "
When Nick returned home he found that his
mother was seriously ill . She had pneumonia . The
sight of her youngest son , the doctor said , was the
only thing that saved her ; it gave her the strength
she needed to fight for life . Soon she was out of
danger , but the doctor told Dan that she would
have to remain in bed for some time and
that thereafter it was essential that she should
not have to exert herself .
With Grace helpless Rose set up her
own autocracy . Her squeaking , querulous
accents were heard without inter-
mission . They rose over the baby's inter-
minable howling and were directed at
everyone in equal measure . She was
a poor and unpunctual cook . Normally
indolent , she was now and again seized
with unpredictable bouts of energy in
the grip of which she swept through
the house with a fury that disarranged
Only the old man's room was too much for
her . Once she put her head round the door ,
and Sam shouted : " You get right out of
this , Rose . You leave me in peace . "
Rose took one breath of the stagnant air .
" You - you polecat ! " she screeched , and
retreated without argument . Her re*?
2gime , hated alike by all the men ,
produced one extraordinary result .
One day Fred met Nick at the front door as they were both
about to enter the house . Fred grasped his brother's elbow .
" Nick , I can't stomach this much longer . " " Nor me . What 's the
answer ? Mum 's picking up , but she 'll never be her old self
again . "
" That First Flower 's driving me nuts , " Fred said . " I 'm going to put
a stop to it . "
" What with - arsenic ? "
Fred fixed his small eyes on his brother , beckoned
him to stand closer , and whispered into his
ear the most unexpected words Nick had
ever heard . " I 'm going to get myself
married , " Fred said . The next day he
brought home a woman in her middle
thirties and took her straight to his
mother's bedside .
" Mum , this is Maggie . I 'm going to marry her ,
and I 'd like her to come and live with us . "
Maggie was plump and plain with a pleasing
smile , a placid nature , and a slow-moving
but methodical mind . For twenty years she
had worked in the bottling-store at the bre-
wery , and Grace heard with astonishment
that Fred had known her on and off
for nearly as long .
It was Nick who found the answer . " Only
one thing for it , Mum , " he said , sitting on
the edge of the bed and holding one
of her hands in his . " Let Fred and
Mag have the two upstairs rooms
between them . Sam will have to
come out of his kennel .
He argued that it was the only place where
he could be safe from Rose . " See here , Sam , "
Nick began . " You know Fred 's getting spliced . "
" Gone soft in the head , " Sam said . " Same as
I 've always said , women rule the roost and
no man 's safe from 'em . Ought to be a
better way of doing things . Take trees . " He
rattled on very happily .
my way of thinking like I 'd educate a child .
" Sam , " Nick said firmly , " either you and
you stick it out up here and we all get
saddled with the First Flower for ever . "
God ! All right , you win ! " With that settled
Fred was soon married . The First Flower
snatched up her infant and departed , mut-
tering sarcasms . The whole household
listened to the dwindling screams of the
baby with relief . Maggie soon proved her
worth , and after a time Dan summed up
" She 's as good a worker as you could wish for .
She speaks our language . Mag 's one of us . "
Nick and his grandfather shared their bedroom
amicably . The old man , though fighting a
grumbling rearguard action , permitted himself
gradually to become a little cleaner and
tidier . In his heart he was well satisfied to
have Nick's company . When they were alone
together he often explained all over again
how shrewd he had been in discovering
Alf Jesty's secret .
" Imagine it , Nick , just that bit of information
Fred picked up about Pete Jesty always touching
his nose , and me remembering from that
snap you once showed me that this Cax-
ton had some sort of a scar there . Just
an idea to begin with , mind you - then
click ! and I 'd got it . That was smart
work , say what you like . "
" It certainly was , Sam , " Nick would agree , and go
on to say with a touch of self-importance : " No
wonder he tried to have me suffocated back
last summer . Must have thought I 'd
rumbled him right from the start . " By this
time Nick was certain in his own mind
that he had really seen Caxton's hand
snatching at the prop holding the barge's
hatch open , though he could never prove it ,
and it would not be of much use if
he could .
The nose is one of the most pain-sensitive
Malone was discovering the truth in
scientific detail . Kennan had only
the far limit of his chain , his
The blow took the writhing thug a fraction
above the boney knob which landmarked the cervical
plexus , the vital nerve-centre which a long-ago
Marine instructor had declared the pinnacle of unarmed
combat targets . The thug collapsed with a whistling
suddenly limp hand . There was no time for
Shouts , and the clatter of feet meant
Goldie and Leo Grundy were on their
way . Kennan pulled the manacle chain
taut , and blasted two shots at the
link which tied him to the ring-bolt in
he threw himself across the floor
towards the entrance .
' Well , what do you think ? ' she scoffed , her
brilliant eyes challenging him . He made no answer .
There was nothing to be said . He lifted his glass
and drained it , feeling the sweat breaking out on the
palms of his hands .
When at last he looked up she was standing right
He could hardly believe it and blinked several times .
' Of course ... anything you like ' , he murmured ,
His throat went tight and words failed him .
' Aw , forget it ' , she said cheerfully . ' I 'll sting
you for a double for being a naughty boy .
How about the telly tomorrow afternoon ? '
He felt a glow of happiness steal over him .
wasn't going to break with him , after all .
world that mattered .
' Of course , Kitty ' , he said fervently , his eyes misty
behind their thick lenses . ' Well , I 'll be off now . See you
tomorrow ... and thank you ... . ' ' So long , Bob ' , she said ,
waving her hand to him . Harry followed him to the
door , opened it for him and stood outside on the step ,
looking up at the sky , where a few pale stars shone
between puffs of light cumulus cloud .
' Nice night ' , he remarked affably . ' But they forecast rain
for tomorrow . ' ' Do they ? ' Bone glanced up at the sky , his
thoughts elsewhere . Personally , he didn't care if it rained cats
and dogs and he knew that Harry didn't either . He waited ,
pulling on his gloves and adjusting his hat . ' Look , Bob , '
Harry began , after a brief silence , ' I don't mean to
butt in , but if you take my advice you 'll 'ave no
more truck with 'er . '
He jerked his thumb over his
shoulder . ' That girl 's nothing but a load
of trouble , I 'm warning you . ' ' Kitty 's
all right ' , Bone contradicted flatly . ' It 's
her boy-friend that 's the trouble . If
we could get rid of him ... ' Harry
nodded his grizzled head like an old
hound . ' You 're right there , Bob ' , he
muttered . ' But it 's easier said than done .
Kitty encourages him , too . No work , no
background , no regular money so far as I
can make out . Probably on the crook .
But there you are , the girl 's wild and
headstrong . I can't do nothing with 'er . '
' Don't worry , Harry ' , the other said quietly .
' I won't make a fool of myself .
Kitty needs a good friend and I 'll
always be that . '
He paused , hatred of Stevie Hewitt
rising like gall in his throat .
' And I 'll find a way of getting rid of
that chap , Hewitt , too . Leave it to me . '
' O.K. , Bob , but watch your step . He 's
a tough customer , mark my words ' , Harry
said in a low voice . Bone half smiled
in the darkness . ' I 'll remember ' , he said .
' Good night , Harry . ' ' Good night , Bob . '
Bone walked down the road , his cre*?
5pe-soled shoes making no sound
on the asphalt surface . As he walked
he concentrated on the problem of
Stevie Hewitt . By comparison with the
manner in which he had dispatched
Henry Mansell the elimination of a
little spiv from Brighton seemed an
easy undertaking ... once he 'd set
his mind to it .
Back at the cottage he prepared his supper and ate
it beside the fire in the living-room , his thoughts once
more on Kitty . If she was really in love with Stevie
Hewitt it was madness to go on worrying about her , he
told himself moodily . Yet it was not as clear-cut as that .
He not only felt his need of her but was equally aware
of the necessity to help and protect her , even against
her will .
Tonight , for the first time , he had abandoned all
pretence and shown her the honest desperation of his feeling
for her . She had neither encouraged nor completely rejected
him . In some perverse way their brief quarrel had forged
a bond between them . No doubt she had every intention
of keeping both of them on a string . On the whole he probably
had a slight advantage over the young man , inasmuch as he
had money to spend and she was a girl who had a healthy
respect for the material things of life .
Sentence Database L04-082
and virile competitor and he knew it . He turned
secret treasure . For an instant he stood
as they riveted themselves on the wall .
Was it his imagination or was the panel slightly lop-sided ?
Leaping forward with a choked sound he grasped the oblong
panel and pulled it out . The black tin box was exactly
as he had left it . With heavily beating heart he reached
out and lifted the lid . Everything was intact and he
gasped with relief .
He lifted out the heavy bundles of notes and knelt on the floor
to count them . Of course , he remembered being in a great hurry to get
that fifty pounds for Kitty ! Obviously he had been careless in
replacing the panel , but the possibility of anyone having
discovered his hiding-place gave him something of a shock .
As he replaced the bundles of notes , he withdrew the tin
box from its hiding-place and locked it inside the
cupboard .
It would be safer under lock and key
for the time being than behind a piece
of panelling which did not fit very sec-
urely . Tomorrow he would buy a
heavy padlock for the box and search
for a new hiding-place . He lay in bed ,
cold and uneasy , unable to account
for an instinctive sense of danger .
When he closed his eyes it was
Henry Mansell's face he saw , hovering
above his head like a hideous caricature . The
parrot nose and straight line of the mouth ,
the pitiless blue eyes that seemed to strip
him right down to his abjectly quaking
bones . The mouldering horror that had
once been Henry Mansell taunted him
now in the silent darkness .
In a corner of the saloon bar of the Six Bells at
Hawkeshurst that Friday night Hugh Mansell and Roddy
Dowell drank their beer and waited . ' It 's too damn busy
in here . We can't expect him to leave his customers ' ,
Hugh said morosely . ' Give him a chance , old chap .
He 'll be over . Jim 's a most reliable chap when
it comes to picking up a small tip . '
' O.K. , Roddy , whatever you say . ' Hugh drained his glass and
ordered two more beers . ' I 'm really beginning to feel it 's
all a bit of a waste of time , anyway . I 've been collecting
scraps of evidence and piecing them together for four
months now , and the whole lot still doesn't amount to
anything one could call concrete . '
Roddy puffed at his pipe , his eyes fixed on the white-coated
barman . ' Oh , I think it does , Hugh . That 's
why I want you to meet this bird . I think
he fills in an important part of the
background . Furthermore , dear boy , it confirms
what we already know of your father's
intention to leave the country on the night
of October 14th . '
Hugh nodded . His face wore the melancholy expression
that was habitual to him but his eyes showed
his inner excitement . ' I know , but from the
moment he walked out of here we haven't a
shred of evidence to prove what happened .
Obviously he met someone , either by chance or
by arrangement . Whichever way it was , that
person had a gun and he managed to persuade
Father to drive along that quiet stretch of
road ... . '
' Miles off his proper route to Dover or the airport at
Lydd ' , Roddy interposed quickly . ' And once there he was
shot at close range and his money smartly filched .
You know , whoever it was might have known of the
existence of the suicide letter ... providing him with
an almost unshakable alibi . ' Hugh was thinking of
his uncle , but said nothing . After all , Julian had
acted very strangely since the tragedy , always
secretive , always reluctant to discuss his brother's
death .
It was impossible to associate him in one's mind with a
cold-blooded murder but , in fact , Henry Mansell's
death had saved the firm and Julian's future .
Moreover he might well have been aware of his
brother's intention to skip out of the country and
passed on the information . ' I 'm sure you 're right ' ,
Hugh said thoughtfully . ' But whoever did it got
clean away without being spotted . '
' Easy enough along that stretch of coast road in winter ,
believe me ' , Roddy affirmed solemnly . ' He probably caught
the next boat across the channel and has been lying low
with the money somewhere . ' Hugh nodded . ' I realized that
after my talk with Mrs. Lawford . There are a dozen countries
where a man could easily hide up and change the money
without danger .
Unless we can get a definite line on him it 's
hopeless ... . ' ' Something will turn up one day , you 'll see ' ,
Roddy said confidently . ' If we plug away at the leads
we have ... . ' ' If only the police would do something ... ' Hugh
cried out in exasperation . ' I 've put everything I know
before them ... . '
' No dice , Hugh . ' Roddy shook his sandy head .
' They 're bound to want pretty solid new evidence
before they 'll agree to reopen the case . From
their point of view the evidence for suicide is
overwhelming . I spoke to a chap from the office of
the Director of Public Prosecutions I know pretty
well , and he agreed that the missing cash is
a hell of a mystery .
But as he quite reasonably pointed out the
money could have been disposed of in London
before your father left that evening . It wouldn't be
unnatural for a man in his position to make provision
for an unknown dependent or settle what he regarded
as particular debts of honour before taking his own
life . Also , logically , there 's nothing to show the
money couldn't have been pinched by someone
passing the car after your father was dead .
Stealing from cars is about the commonest
kind of crime in the book . There 's nothing
that absolutely ties the missing money to the
circumstances of your father 's death , that 's
the point . Same with the passport . It 's gone
and that 's that . It may turn up in a dustbin
somewhere or at the back of a drawer . As
far as the police are concerned there 's nothing
to go on .
In our own minds we may be pretty sure what
happened , but that 's not good enough for them .
That suicide letter did the trick - definite proof
that your father took his life , backed by
medical evidence and the fingerprint chaps . '
A little man with thin brown hair and a
ruddy complexion came over and greeted
them .
He wore a short white coat . Hugh ordered drinks .
' I was sorry to read about your dad in the
paper ' , the man said to Hugh in a thick
voice which bore traces of a cockney accent .
' I was telling your friend how he come
in here the very night he passed away . '
Hugh wasn't impressed with this ingratiating bar-
man whom Roddy had raked up . He was seedy and
middle-aged with small black eyes set close to-
gether beneath heavily marked brows and a sly ,
crafty expression that failed to inspire confidence .
' He was hitting the bottle pretty hard , sir ... ' the
man said in a loud whisper . ' Meaning no offe-
nce ' , he added , looking at Hugh .
" Why ? " he asked again . " I can tell by your voice that it means
a lot to you , but I 'm damned if I can see the reason . It 's not as
if you were all that fond of Alice . " He was interrupted by the
arrival of the food and wine . When the pouring ritual was over he
went on :
If he didn't do it it must have been - " " Must have been
who ? " Max prompted . I looked into his eyes and longed
with all my heart to tell him , but I could not do it .
As long as my suspicion remained in my head I could pretend
to myself , in moments of optimism , that it was not true .
If you 're right , you may be in serious danger from Hardy .
Even if you 're wrong you 'll most certainly be in danger when
you start handling a boat . " He picked up his glass and
held it in both hands , looking at me thoughtfully over the
top of it . " No , " he said at last . " I can't allow # #
it . "
" You can't very well stop me . " " I can
do better than that . If we were to
get married now I could come
with you . " I looked down at my
plate , not daring to let him see
how much the idea appealed to
me , reminding myself that he could
only have said such a thing
because he did not know the
whole truth .
" And I can't allow that , " I said .
" Deadlock , " said Max . " No , it isn't .
I 'm determined to go , and by myself ,
whatever you say . " " I was afraid of
that . " He sounded resigned but none
the less hopeful . " You 're a very
wilful woman but I 'll change
your mind for you one of these
days .
" You can see it any time you like , "
he told me . " The sooner the better .
If you can get to Bletcham this
evening I 'll run you up there
in the car . " " That 's very nice of
you . " " Nice , nothing . I told you ,
I 'm mad about boats . Seven
thirty do you ?
I could meet you at the bus station . "
" No , " I said , " outside your office . "
I could not endure the thought
of another wait at the bus station .
He was there punctually . Dressed
in a loud tartan shirt and abbreviated
shorts he looked hardly more than
a boy , a cheerful , good-natured
boy . He settled me into the car
with touching care and then
drove like a fiend along
the river road .
Ten minutes later he stopped in a lane
and helped me out with the same
careful courtesy . " What sort of boat is it ? "
I asked . " She , " he corrected . " She 's a
converted life-boat . Not a very good one ,
but she 's sound enough and the
engine 's fine . "
Inside , she was untidy and grubby but
roomy enough and well lit by two rows of
good-sized windows . It was a long time
before I got used to calling them
portholes . The owner was a middle-aged
man whose family had tired of the
limited excitement of the river and now
had their eyes on a seagoing boat .
Clive - he insisted on being called Clive -
haggled with him and within half an hour
Sandpiper was mine for three hundred and
fifty pounds . When all the business details
had been settled and the owner had
departed with my cheque in his pocket ,
Clive started the engine and gave me my
first lesson in manoeuvring up and down
the river and in and out of the other boats .
It was a warm , still evening ; the plop of
fish and the gentle putter of the engine
were infinitely soothing after city noises ,
and I began to look forward to my life
on the water . At last he pronounced
me riverworthy and wanted to know when
I would be moving in .
Like Clive , he was enthusiastic about the
engine and decided , apparently on the strength
of its efficiency , that Sandpiper was fit to
live in . I was more than thankful for his help
when we had installed my things and the
boat began to move . The river was crowded
with flocks of sailing boats which
swirled round us like gulls and there
were two locks to negotiate , but Max
seemed to know exactly what to do
and at the same time kept me supplied
" How on earth do you know all this ? " I asked
him . " I used to play about in these things
when I was a kid . And then I acted as guide
on a river boat one summer , to keep myself
going between terms at college . " It was
the first I had heard of it , but that 's
one of the things I like about Max .
He has done so many things that there
is always something new and exciting to
discover about him . " You 're wonderful , " I
said , meaning it . He pressed the tip of my
nose with one finger . " That makes two of us . "
It was about eight o'clock in the evening
when we tied up almost exactly opposite
Hardy's garden and went up on to the
roof of the cabin to see what we could see .
From this side , Rivermead was less forbidding ;
it stood a long way back from the water
at the end of a velvety lawn flanked with
flowering trees and shrubs . To the right of
the lawn , close to the water's edge , stood an
ancient boathouse shrouded in wistaria ; it
was built across a narrow backwater
and there was a delicate iron staircase
climbing the outer wall to a room above .
" You won't see anyone tonight , it 's too late , " Max
said and turned to go . " No - wait , " I put out a
hand to stop him . The sun was no longer shining
and it was dark across there by the trees ,
but I thought I had seen something move .
A shudder , more mental than physical , ran
through him , and his mind seemed to
melt away into emptiness . His bulging
eyes caught the reclining form of Heather ,
who was still repeating in sing-song :
" ... I will not give in ... " He stared at her
blankly , mouthing an incoherent gabble
of half words .
He slapped himself in the face and
cuffed the sides of his head . Then
by degrees the rotating objects
the form of the furnishings in Dan
Brown's living room . He stood up un-
trying to gather his wits . Outside the
silhouette , already a solid black .
switched it on . Heather McNabb still lay
on the couch , her body uncomfortably twisted
and afflicted with occasional spasmodic jerks .
He went to the kitchen for water and found
Dan . Dan was lying on a long bench in the
breakfast nook , his head bent upright
His usually animated face was expressionless and looked flat ,
as though his nose had been pushed back and his eyes and cheeks
brought forward . He mouthed a low mutter , punctuated at intervals
with a few syllables of a crazy and incoherent jargon . As
Steve looked at him his mouth suddenly snapped shut ,
with jaws askew .
There was utter imbecility in his blank face . Presently the
muttering started again , and went on and on . Stunned and
shaken , Steve drew a glass of water and went back to
Heather . Half an hour later Heather and Steve were still
trying to shake-off the last traces of hypnotic after-effects .
For several minutes they had been facing each other across
a low table , like two old convalescents thoroughly bored with
each other through forced association .
Then something like a zest for living began to come back
to Steve and he squeezed her hand . Her face took on
enough animation to produce a wan smile . Dan's low mut-
tering was just audible from the kitchen . And Steve
could see that as Heather recovered her senses and emotions
she was growing cold and numb with shock . She had seen
Dan , or rather the physical relic of him - the empty
shell of flesh and bone , devoid of intellect and
personality .
And these had been his great qualities ,
so attractive to her . The Base Station had
gone before , discharging its narrow plane of
4ementalating energy along the length of
the Earth's imaginary longitudes , moving
eastward like a knife-edged twilight in
reversed progression . It had brought the
First Stage in the Thetan pattern of conquest ,
the empty-minded receptiveness that
prepared the way for the Second Stage .
side to side .
loses its beat in death .
The Thetans must not see him ! He took another route
to Heather's and saw two more flying saucers on
the way . Heather was very anxious to visit Dan at
once ; but Steve insisted that they should first discuss
their situation , as far as it could be assessed ,
and to decide on what seemed to be the best
way of meeting it .
them .
nevertheless .
down , up and down .
Board .
Hostettler
to 4sub-lil on the lower .
your mouth-organ . '
Sentence Database
as a statesman . "
of law .
first two centuries ?
the parade .
trans-economic .
head-shrinkers .
a moment ... '
Rev. Edwards .
damn bus .
Ward 10 .
weep ...
sort of rocket ? "
fifty thousand feet .
have forgotten him .
taken an interest .
you will be asking .
a supply of food . "
" Dinas High Street ? "
a great basket .
chocolate .
know little , we know much . '
Flor were listening .
spoke for the first time .
from harm . '
everlasting night .
had no place here .
efficient .
no permanent image .
miles .
his flat for a drink .
north of the island .
ignorant child .
fault . "
" I know . Absurd as it may seem , I didn't want
you to think badly of me . " She turned away
from him to fondle Judy , who , sensing something
amiss , was nudging her in the endeavour to
gain her attention . " The truth is that
if I had absolutely insisted on sailing at the
time originally arranged , Sir John would
have had it in for Guy .
You see , it was , apparently , through a mistake
on Guy's part that we missed seeing the
flamingoes our first morning on the island . "
" What harm could possibly have come to Forrest
through Sir John's nonsense ? " Piers could
hardly have spoken with more contempt .
A bully like that respects anyone who
dares to stand up to him . "
Beryl tried to suppress the thought that this was
precisely the remark she had made to Guy .
She said icily , " As you pride yourself on
your knowledge of all the affairs of the
island I needn't tell you that Sir John
Graybury is one of Mr. Hewson's most
important customers . " " So what ? You 're not
trying to say that Hewson would victimise
Forrest for behaving with ordinary moral
courage !
He 's quite capable of telling Sir John to take
himself and his business to an unmention-
able destination . " " There 's a difference
between what a senior and a junior
partner can do , " was her quick reply .
" What they can bring off ! I 'll admit that .
But Forrest might at least have tried . He 's
pretty spineless ! "
" You think you could have carried more weight
with Sir John ? " she enquired cuttingly .
" For all your good opinion of yourself ,
I doubt it . He 's about as easy to push around
as - as a grounded whale ! " He had to smile
at that , but went on airily , " I 'd have made
an attempt to show my lady-love that I
put her interests before my own .
She was tempted to laugh , but it was as though that barb still stuck
in her quivering flesh . " You 've an answer - of sorts - for everything , " she
said shortly . " Personally I 've no more to say , so I suggest we get
along . " To her great relief they arrived at the cluster of little houses
where Hubert had been living to find the old man stowing in
leisurely fashion his few possessions into a ramshackle and
incredibly ancient car , surrounded by innumerable friends and relatives .
at the Villa in time .
habit .
blouse and pantaloons .
from the west .
yawl recover .
huh ? "
how I hate the Navy !
garden !
sticking .
*?2s as ' Seaweed ' , and a youngish , sharp-eyed
and tonic .
in the Daily Courier .
the Courier .
challenging .
said John .
'em up , darling ! "
in the shiny papers ? "
Service matters . "
up on that .
said John .
some sort .
far between .
suitable for such occasions .
in it . "
the agency detective . "
last night . "
malpais .
thirst .
in pairs .
was never long on patience .
night . "
Shorty .
with them all right . "
kind of sequence .
speak normally .
flights back . "
and refilled it .
cafe*?2 , " Doc said , " they are packed
ging a smile .
-----------------------------------------------------
your time on that chap .
broken arm .
her .
was hurt for herself .
normally .
one to take ?
all about that . "
that lark , I can tell you ! "
Little Phelpham .
asked hopefully .
very evening ?
all important . "
handsome at other times .
two-timing Don Juan .
you . "
told her .
to be met at the gates .
hospital .
Beryl's death . '
Philip bristled . ' It was never our intention
to have one of those carnival affairs , ' he
retorted and in that second , he became the man of
success exerting authority . Sandra watched her father's
face pale . Philip , she knew , got on his nerves , but
everything had gone over her head . It didn't really
matter what was being said because she was
no longer a part of it .
The thought of Nicholas haunted her , the sense of
loss crucifying . Her father's comment roused her as
he said , ' I was not talking of a carnival . But I
presume we shall be allowed to have one or two
of our friends at the ceremony . '
He had long sensed injustice in the distinctions
drawn between ordinary wage-earners and those
self-employed . By the time his monthly salary
arrived , the Inland Revenue had already taken
their share , and there were precious few
reductions in tax save for wives , children ,
life-insurances or any of the other normal
encumbrances which Cecil had so far avoided .
He read the film star's sorry story and frowned at the
provisions of Schedule D taxation which not only allowed her
to claim relief on the most unlikely purchases , but also
postponed demanding the tax until her financial year
was ended , audited and agreed by the Inspector . The
process could , and often did take several years .
At one point the astute Miss Cheesecake
had claimed tax relief on the pur-
chase of several mink coats which ,
it seemed , were necessary to fur-
ther her career . Alternatively , it
was reported , she tearfully claimed
that the warm coats were heating
appliances and therefore susceptible
to a depreciation tax allowance
as plant and machinery . The
Between all the interested parties , the final
agreement had been delayed long enough for
Miss Cheesecake to spend all the money which
by rights should have been reserved for her tax .
Discounting one chinchilla jacket , a Rolls-
Royce and a Sussex manor house , all
three of which were in her husband's name ,
she now declared herself bankrupt .
The train drew into another station
and Cecil , with a further six stops
to go , was left almost alone in the
coach . He fumed as he recol-
lected the long correspondence he
had had with the Inland Reve-
nue in an effort to obtain
tax relief for a jacket used
solely in the office . ' If the jacket
is a condition of your employment , '
the Inspector had written , ' it may
qualify for relief . '
' It 's not mine . I wasn't sitting there . ' She blinked
disdainfully at him and stepped out .
It was a new briefcase , and as the train jogged along
the shiny clasp twinkled invitingly at Cecil .
He wondered what it contained . Probably the remains
of someone's lunch or a few secret files .
He smiled at his own joke .
It was locked . Eager fingers felt bulky contents and
of wads of paper . ' Cor ! ' he muttered aloud , ' there 's
five thousand at least . ' He felt in his jacket pocket
and pulled out a key ring . In succession he tried
his own briefcase key , a suitcase key and a
device designed to lock typewriters .
Cecil searched in his pockets once
more and came up with two
paper-clips . After a few seconds
of twisting , he roughly thrust a
bent wire loop into the lock and
waggled it around vigorously .
There was a click and the
briefcase opened . Cecil thrust an
pound notes .
They closed on a single bundle and , fumbling with
nervous excitement , he pulled it out . His eye
rested on a wad of stiff white paper printed on one
side . ' Old fashioned fivers ! ' he muttered again , and
tried to recall if they were still legal tender . Surely the
Govr. and Compa. of the Bank of England would never
break their promise to pay on rude demand , let
alone on polite request .
Cecil frowned in disappointment as he focussed upon the
printing to find no Govr. , no Compa. , in fact no five pound notes
at all . He was holding a paper booklet , the top sheet of which
bore , in large Baskerville type , the words METROPOLITAN
MONOTECHNIC INSTITUTE ADVANCED ACCOUNTANCY
COURSE NO. 3 . He ruffled the sheets irritably and
glowered at his own breach of social morality .
He climbed the stairs , eager to unload the
guilt-symbol upon the ticket-collector and then
to emerge carrying his shame unseen , but burning ,
into the night . He reached the barrier and
fumbled for his contract before thrusting the
briefcase at the ticket-collector with the firm
intention of playing the dutiful citizen
retrieving lost property .
Sentence Database
Before he could open his mouth , the collector
is hanging open . You 'll have someone shoving their hot
both briefcase and conscience , stumbled away
into the darkness .
' HELLO , CECIL . HAD a busy day ? ' His mother came into
case into hiding between the do-it-yourself cupboard
and the polished brass fourteen-pounder shell-case
for the labels from half a hundredweight of
Trunk and Greppes Tannin-free Tea .
Cecil gritted his teeth and glowered at the
inequity of Miss Cheesecake well-nigh bathing
in tax-free champagne whilst he had to go
easy on the immersion heater . ' What is it ,
Cecil ? Don't you feel well ? ' his mother
asked solicitously . ' You do look tired .
Go and get yourself a drink . ' ' Don't
fuss , mother ! I 'm quite well and no more
tired than usual , and we finished the gin
last week , you know that . '
Cecil stepped towards the dining room . ' I 'm
sure you must be tired , ' his mother insisted .
' You 're very irritable , anyway . ' ' I 'm NOT tired
and I 'm NOT irritable . ' ' Very well then . ' His
mother nodded with understanding . ' You 're not tired .
Nobody 's tired . Now just you run along
upstairs and wash your hands whilst I get
dinner ready . '
Cecil wriggled irritably under the misplaced management
of a mother who had failed to realise that a son
who is nearly bald is no longer a baby . He started to
climb the stairs , stamping with unnecessary vigour upon
the treads . ' And don't wipe the dirt off on the
towel like you did yesterday .
Your Auntie Edie 's coming in for a cup of tea later and
you know how she has a good look round everywhere . ' There was
a tinkle and a thud from beside the coat cupboard . Cecil's
mother turned around in time to see the briefcase collapse
against the brass umbrella stand . ' Well now ! ' She hurried
towards it and picked it up .
' What have we here ? A new briefcase ! So THAT 'S
what it 's all about . ' Cecil halted in
mid-step near the top of the stairs and
What 's all about ? ' he hissed without
turning round . She pointed to the
briefcase . ' So that 's why you are so
irritable . You thought that I 'd think
you 'd been extravagant . '
' But I 'm NOT irritable ! ' He rushed down
the stairs and , snatching the case , ran back
upstairs with it . ' And I 've NOT been
extravagant . ' " Naughty ! ' she called
after him . ' Mother knows her boy .
Arnold Olner
In spite of all the transferred maternity
she was endowed with by her patients ,
poor Serena was an infant-in-arms as
a buyer of property . No , not even an
infant-in-arms but a new-born babe , a
premature piece of frailty in an oxygen-
tent of utter innocence . The complexity of
that innocence was colossal . It had layer
after layer of illusion to be peeled off and
replaced with sad knowledgeability .
It was a nakedness of nai"vety to be
of experience . Her first illusion consisted in
the belief that all she need do was to go to
an agent , visit half a dozen houses in one
day , choose one , make an offer , put it in
the hands of a lawyer and go away on her
holiday while the whole transaction was
put through .
Fortunately , however , the fashion for Victorian
architecture which Mr. John Betjeman had
started several decades before had caught on
at last and therefore saved the situation for
the affluent middle-class , who now had plenty
of lovely-ugly to be coldly elegant in . All this
Serena discovered , and more , but in stages . For the
on a small pink terraced cottage , two beds ,
two inter-comm. rec. , mod. k. and b. , sep. W.C.
small back yard , newly dec. , near shops and tube
The next thing that Serena discovered was that
she could not afford to buy a house at all .
And this in spite of having at last managed
to save the ten percent needed . Or so she
thought , being then in possession of what
seemed to her the princely sum of six hund-
red pounds . The lawyer said :
" Of course you must count about two hundred
for legal charges and stamp duties ,
maybe less , depending on the price of the
house , and whether it has been regis-
tered . I take it you have a mortgage lined
up , then , Mrs. - er - Buttery ? " " Not yet ,
but the bank would give me a loan , I 'm
sure . " " Er , yes . You have some securities ,
then ? "
His aspect was as dusty as his office , with scurf
from dusty hair on the dusty shoulders of his black
suit , cigarette ash down the front , an ashen face
and yellow sleepy dust in the corners of his pale
grey eyes . His finger-nails were dirty , though he
tried to make up for it by constantly paring them
with the finger-nail of the opposite hand .
His voice was like his black and pin-stripe ,
a grey superimposition of respectability over
the original colour of his own natural vowels ,
the result being somehow as ineffective , not
just dusty-grey but muddy , slimy even .
His digressions too , seemed to have no other
purpose than the throwing of dust in his
client's eyes , the dust of fake security , of
the fake friend of the family , like the
" Yes , well ... . " He judged that she had been sufficiently
dazzled and gave a long raucous cough . " Only
cigarettes worth smoking , these . Most unhealthy , English
ones . Well , now , let me see . I think I can put you onto
some people who might , I say might , let you have a mortgage on
this property ... . " " But , they 're safe , are they ? I mean ,
they 're not - money-lenders ? " " Mrs. - er - Buttery ,
all mortgage companies are money-lenders .
That 's rather the point , isn't it ? " " No , but I mean - "
" I know what you mean . You may trust me , Mrs.
Buttery . I think , however , that you might have
to revise your ideas about - er - the type of
property you intend to purchase . " She revised
them . The little man from the Inter-Insular
( British Archipelago ) Insurance Company soon
saw to that .
allow for the wife's earnings .
Our lawyers - " " Who are your lawyers ? "
" Clacton's . " " Well , I 'm damned . " " Now , let me see ,
you say your husband earns about ... yes ,
that would come to ... three , carry seven , six
nines are fifty four - of course we 'd have to
have some sort of proof , you know , it 's very
difficult with self-employed persons , carry two .
Yes . I 'm afraid we couldn't raise this loan to more
than three thousand three fifty at the most . Now you
could get quite a nice little semi-detached house in
Grimstead for three thousand , that 's where I live , just
before the green belt , lovely and modern , you know .
I forgot to tell you , we don't usually lend any
house built earlier than 1918 . "
" You see , " she propounded to Rupert after her last patient
had gone , " we can get three thousand three fifty ,
perhaps a little more if we can cheat your earnings
a bit . I 'm sure you could raise the rest from
one of your publishers , get two books commissioned
and write them later . I 've got a bit owing too .
Now , I saw some flats in Hendon for four thou ,
and some in West Hampstead for four two fifty ,
two beds , two reception , k. and b. , just think ,
our own bathroom .
Much more spacious than that poky little cottage ,
which wasn't a bit practical really , the
reception room was too small when divided
and too big when not .
Vence is a sober spot , half way between small
town and village , pigeon grey , sly with arches , and
linked by a whispering plot of fountains . In the main
tree-heavy square you can sit in the autumn
sunshine , still burning like a half-cooled iron ,
sip pastis and read the local newspapers .
One called La Patriote is Communist , and at the time
of our arrival it was throwing huge over-ripe verbal
tomatoes at General de Gaulle . One side of this square
is a smart but modest bar called Pierre's Bar . For one
day , with the help of the Syndicat d'Initiative , we had been
hunting for furnished rooms , and had given up , when an
elderly lady , the owner of a residence called the Poet's Nest ,
had firmly closed the door in our noses .
' It is a pity , ' said Mart , ' because it would have been
a good address . ' Now , after a woman's radar look ,
she decided Pierre would solve our problems . This
was true , Pierre was a true Provenc*?6al , thin and
yellow as lemon peel , wrestling with some gnawing rat
of an illness , man of all trades , married to a commanding
lady who loved small talk and the discreet
accumulation of money .
We went in . There were a few people in the bar ,
elderly , well-off , artistic , who , you felt , had made a hard
bargain for giving up . ' I have furnished rooms , ' said
Pierre , ' and all mod cons . ' The price was 16,000 francs a
month . ' Yes , ' we said immediately , even before viewing .
We were shown around by Pierre .
The flat was on the third floor ; two rooms ; soft Provenc*?
6al view ; good intimate furnishing and colour ; running
hot water from Butagas installation for washing-up ,
basin and bidet ; own private , modern lavatory . The
first night's sleeping was like a long convalescence .
We were woken up twice about dawn by a soft
eruption of turtle-doves .
This was strange , even magic , because the owner's
name was Pierre Tortorolo which , in Nicoison Italian means
' turtledove ' . Pierre Turtledove . When we woke up properly it
was raining , an even more hopeless rain than London , and we
looked out of the windows at the weeping trees and the
curling white breath of the mountains . The land looked
like a beaten woman and the turtle-doves cried her
shame .
There they were , in fact , below us , eight of them .
Four of them were flattened on the window sills , two
immolated on a nearby roof top , the other pair copulating .
We had a morning at Pierre's . He talked about people .
Marc Chagall used to live here and an Englishman named
Lawrence . He was here , near the railway station , three or
four years . During this period he wrote a book ,
The Lover of Lady Chatterly .
No , he hadn't read it ; Madame did all the
reading . Lawrence died in this very place .
He used to come to Pierre's Bar again and
again . No , he couldn't really remember
him , he was one of the crowd . The
sun came out ; Mart went shopping ; I
sat in the square reading the Patriote .
There was a front-page rear-attack on de
to murders , apart for an outcry against a
proposal to drop radio-active material into
the Mediterranean between Corsica and St
Raphael . All the murders were well documented
and had the air of being written by an
ingenious , but mad film director of the
Thirties .
They mostly occurred in lonely farm-houses .
Monsieur H , for instance , had been clubbed and
father-in-law , after muddling up some sheep
group then sat down for a late lunch
before the father-in-law telephoned the police .
troubles , had written to the local
paper and the superintendent of police ,
informing them that he was on the point
but there was no Monsieur V. He telephoned
a few minutes later from a nearby village ,
apologising for the trouble , but explaining
that the walls were porous and the
gas had escaped . General relief was
expressed , but Monsieur V ( this was
actually reported in the next issue ) returned
who hid himself in a bush and imitated
a blackbird . Unfortunately a sporting taxi-driver
was after this very bird and shot the farm-
labourer in the face . All , however ,
ended well , reported the paper , since the
pellets were easily removed and the
labourer was able to return to work the
same afternoon .
We travelled down to Nice on the Lambretta .
You can free-wheel down a quarter of the
way . In the middle of the journey is a
valley with a sea of vines and olives
and beaches of earth pricked to blood by
the hoe . Rising from the flecked sea are
like limpets to the rock .
There is a curd of morning smoke and
a muffled bell taps the sky . Here we
stopped , as in fine weather we always
stopped . Down below is the village of
heat and cold like the hands of
early smells , the dark bosoms of
beech and the thin pine fingers
kissed by the sun .
Then here was Nice , and the old holiday
sea , blue as a new school exercise
book . The same old Nice , creamy ,
vulgar , out of time , bitter-sweet with
the ghosts of dead monarchs and brilliant
to the old sleeping port . This , and
could catch the taste of dead dreams on
my tongue like spray .
We parked the Lambretta opposite the
Negresco , and went to the beach to
they galloped to the walls and spumed
crowd had collected . There were firemen
and policemen and ambulances , and the
eyes of the spectators were hard with
disaster .
They all had that neat look of
could ever happen , the chosen sane , the
uncuckolded , unrobbed , sheltered from
disease and accident by doctors , God and
the municipality . Yet , at any time now ,
the bell would ring for them - the gilded
love house , the mad grandmother or the
bloody child at the crossroads .
It was growing cold . We left the
crowd and drove back to Vence .
The cool evening perfumes stood
beckoning at the corners of the roads .
Mart is unable to smell ( her sense
organs were impaired years ago ) , and
I had to explain the low , sharp and
sweet signals in the air . When we
got back home we felt exhausted .
London sickness ( a sense of guilt ,
mingled with the memory of sandwiches
We went straight to bed and slept until
the turtle-doves drummed up the
sun . The next morning , in the square
opposite Pierre's , I read about the Nice
beach catastrophe in the Patriote .
Mart had been right , the body had been
a woman's . It belonged to a Madame
N. Enquiries had been made in the
neighbourhood , and it transpired that
Madame N's husband had made an
arrangement with the dead lady's sister
The sister , able to swim , had returned
to the shore , but instead of returning
to her brother-in-law ( with whom
she had an illicit relationship ) , she
went to her fiance*?2's house and
confessed everything . Her fiance*?2
reported her to the police , and then jumped
off a cliff near Monte Carlo .
The day I promised to take Catherine
down to visit my young friend Philip
at his school in the country , we were
to leave at eleven , but she arrived
at nine . Her blue dress was new ,
and so were her fashionable shoes . Her
hair had just been done . She looked
more than ever like a pink and gold
Renoir girl who expects everything from
life .
Catherine lives in a white house
overlooking the sweeping brown tides
of the river . She helped me clean up my
flat with a devotion which said that
she felt small flats were altogether more
romantic than large houses . We drank
tea , and talked mainly about Philip , who ,
being 15 , has pure stern tastes in every-
thing from food to music .
Catherine looked at the books lying
around his room , and asked if she
might borrow the stories of Isaac Babel
to read on the train . Catherine is 13 .
I suggested she might find them dif-
ficult , but she said , ' Philip reads them ,
doesn't he ? ' During the journey I read
newspapers and watched her pretty
frowning face as she turned the
pages of Babel , for she was determined
to let nothing get between her and
At the school , which is charming , ci-
vilised and expensive , the two children
walked together across green fields , and
I followed , seeing how the sun gilded
their bright friendly heads turned
towards each other as they talked . In
Catherine's left hand she carried the
stories of Isaac Babel . After lunch we
went to the pictures . Philip allowed
# it to be seen that he thought going to
the pictures just for the fun of it was
For his sake we chose the more
serious of the two films that were
showing in the little town . It was
about a good priest who helped cri-
minals in New York . His goodness , how-
ever , was not enough to prevent one
of them from being sent to the gas
chamber ; and Philip and I waited with
Catherine in the dark until she had stopped
crying and could face the light of a golden
evening .
At the entrance of the cinema the
doorman was lying in wait for anyone
who had red eyes . Grasping Catherine
by her suffering arm , he said bitterly :
' Yes , why are you crying , he had to be
punished for his crime , didn't he ? ' Cathe-
rine stared at him , incredulous . Philip
rescued her by saying with disdain :
' Some people don't know right from wrong
even when its demonstrated to them . '
The doorman turned his attention
to the next red-eyed emerger from the
dark ; and we went on together to
the station , the children silent because
of the cruelty of the world . Finally Catherine
said , her eyes wet again : ' I think its all
absolutely beastly , and I can't bear to think
about it . ' And Philip said : ' But we 've got
to think about it , don't you see , because
if we don't it 'll just go on and on , don't
you see ? '
In the train going back to London I sat
beside # Catherine . She had the stories open
in front of her , but she said : ' Philip 's awfully lucky .
I wish I went to that school . Did you notice
that girl who said hullo to him in the garden ?
not only during the life of the deserter , but forever after . As
vilified
-chiavels have been more directly repugnant to the
in order to save the life of a person bitten in the finger
C
in four or five or six Years , Justice is in season . Whether the 
-mounting in its effects to the repeal of an imperative law 
from any Judge thereof  , full true and perfect answer make to all 
3
-cular the price of Bricks hath within the said period undergone 
-ther expence to Government 
to the profit of the offence upon the rate above established
 (  _ I mean the worthy Magistrate _  )  It is a yet but
Doctrine might discover .
would take it . It could ultimately fall upon no more than 
so from time to time be at liberty to deliver in an account of all 
into intelligible Language ; of which kind , I
lovers of improvements , and by the lovers of 
 " transportation to this country , not many could hope to obtain the 
 : ters :  of an air more pure than common ; or of particular
whether it be valuable in itself , as a piece of gold or silver :  or re : 
year to that of persons living at the commence-
subjecting it to his will and pleasure .
would have been presented to a capable mind by forecast , had 
amounting in its effects to the enactment of a positive impera-
Exposition .
THEFT .
maintenance of the said thousand Prisoners for one year )  
neck or in some other  <gap/>  manner be connected with
the 
Restrictions become necessary to keep it streight ;
it ' s Signification with the former of these , being the 
6 .
for the County . _  
 : ratively but rare . In England at present there is now 
living at the commencement of such year  , taking for the 
maticians call them it ' s dimensions . Dimensions "  comes from  " Di-
who appear to have an interest in the house
life , Remainder to the said Samuel Bentham , Remainder 
 : clude an exemplary degree of infamy ; it should be such as puts 
least 
 : though it be ever so true that the man who passed it off knew 
Coining is a species of Forgery . The impression given 
complaints and  " petitions from the settlers there  ( on Norfolk Island ) 
other kind of graphical discourse :  as by printing ,
in aid of that which consists simply in the application of Punish= 
be a mistake with regard to the matter of right , or in
of the work at present performed Government :   _  _  _ 
almost unavoidable difference between estimated and actual ex-
for this use , have been found in the country , yet a supply of hoops and
the word  [  " prescribed "  ]  and  [  " dictated "  ]  the best that can be said of them 
Penitentiary Panopticon two years :  not exceeding 
Of Justifications .
 : ledge should be taken for granted unless the contrary be 
for building a penetentiary House , &c &c  _  
Reasons . 
side of the wainscoat could , either of them , by their 
that used to lays its eggs and hatch its young ones . This 
 : ly at work . Of the consumable Stock  , the expence of fewel 
erected with their appurtenances during his natu- 
To do our Author justice , it must be acknowledged , that though 
56
-cause a bare resolution confined in the breast of the Legisla-
any respect at the mercy of his enemy ; on the other hand the
5
 : lowed to use be allowed to keep it by him at all times  ; it
in consequence of the report , to any particular Jew , the Offender can
 " persons , who sometime since would gladly have sent their wheat 
-ing them a share in the produce . 
and his said Successors shall respectively be made Debtors 
 : er or even a confederacy of offenders is not so great as at first sight 
smaller value , the poorer the person is who is likely to suffer by its 
should refuse to obey such Orders , & as he 
C
to
Contracts such lawful clauses , covenants , and agreements , as
no safer rule can be adopted , than by taking the greatest num-
such Contract or Contracts as therein and herein mentioned , or sooner 
 " rule of faith . "   [ Here our Author has con-
carrying away & not a taking , what a taking was ; and
a part of it at least , on pain of seeing the above 
3 .
I have no eye-witness to depose , that as often as 
general may serve to include all such acts of which it is supposed that 
6 .
Art . 21 . To keep the management of the said in-
on failure of issue the offender stood next in succession
Art . 18 . The life of each Prisoner is to be insured by the
Of Personal Insults . 
=ission and obedience  ( they are among the necessary duties
 " Mr Fords Observations upon a Contract between
on 
 there
that happened was the very mischief that was intended .
default of such Feoffee so appointed , such seizin and possession
instead of being of a pleasurable is of a painful na :  
Nature of the Act ; and  ' tis from thence as we  <gap/>  shall
same amount , but of that retarded commencement .
Observations
or other necessaries for the Prisoners actually consumed within 
 " as the public concerns of the nation would admit , of adminis-
a clean shirt at least twice in every week . 
the piece to be defaced ; that composition and that alone might 
pretended mother was or was not privy to the Imposture .
 : fered to his representative  . Such an expedient can 
ly are the incidents from which such opportu=
Majesty shall appoint , untill such offender shall be transported 
more serious one , is that which the worthy Magistrate
Coin without being detected , will even bear but a small 
On the affirmative it has been holden ,
staircase and whisper in his ear -up or not up
 : vide against such a contingency the best expedient
party most interested in the case , viz :  the Husband :  so that if
-rees it is stated that they had not yet served the full period
and honest Industry , if he ever had any , are obliterated ; his 
valuable possession a stranger has is his character this
possibility of a reply :   _  that this proceeding being an act of
found to stand in need thereof 
amount to the damage by the injury from such felony , except 
other :  insomuch that their origin can no longer be perceivable . 
to point to in the improved prisons in question , 
the produce of their labour , taking on himself the 
Punishment
in the main , is from the nature of things liable in particular in= 
 : cle is more apt indeed in this case to regard the time than the
of August 1792 , near four years after the first arrival ,  " the getting 
by such Articles ; or Corn that is left in a field after gathering 
In the first case they are susceptible of all the varieties 
 : stances the rich must be punished more than otherwise 
fire to were his own property or that of 
  to 
of their Tempers :  if they will not , a Man plainly
Panopticon 
other words of the matter of Law
such Penitentiary House or Houses when built with 
together with the supplemental allowance stipulated for as above 
Thereto  .  _ 
I
any exception that I could observe , to all these 
accepted , his capital with the concurrence of the 
To the purpose of Disablement nothing can be bet= 
to the efficacy of the means which the place is enabled to
with each of those persons a greater quantity of good Coin in 
- " pose of attacking and plundering the settlers , Being unwilling to take 
circumcised it , whereby a mob rises and commits outrag=
II Collins
indemnification of the party or parties damnified by such felony , 
down a Bag of Money from a Carriage passing by .
if occasion shall require , it shall and may be lawful for his 
-soners in the course of each year out of the 
7
The state of the public stores with respect to salt provisions
themselves the complexion of the business .
For disturbing a man in the exercise of conjugal rights 
members of any corporation , or sect , or political state should be defamed
of another who has lost to the same value by an act of sharp=
as they have been by the very discipline which should 
management of the said Jeremy Bentham and 
- " pare for the reduction that would certainly take place in the next 
2 . Upon petition of the Husband he shall be banished
First the existence of such an abuse  _  and for
11
some other sorts , and these from some fancied pre-eminence , were 
-panied by proper vouchers for the proof as well of 
Of Insulting Threats . 
 : my .
persons of those descriptions under the guardianship of particu=
the ring and destroys it . For according to the rule
natural life with the same powers as those which his 
My Lord , my answer is as distinct as possible .
Hulk 
In any Case it is given either upon oath or without oath .
The title of Offences against the National Interest in 
the amount of not less than twice the profit of the offence .
at the same periods respectively with every 
 : pectively to occupy for the time being :  that proximity being a
used for human food , or with messes made of oat-
 : riage ; hunting , shooting , playing at games of Exercise .
-livered in on or about the 17th of March 1793 And Whereas 
To p .
 " in the public stores rendering it necessary to deduct two pounds
recapture within the term of six months .
the street of a town or village :  or even in a
 " to the community than that which is here pointed out "  . * 
 " on account , not only of their former heavy losses , but of the exorbitant prices of 
 " if the store at the Hawkesbury being opened for the recept-
intended Governor will be to be made Creditor on account 
the people , to be summoned as aforesaid , to make , constitute
Exposition
from the presence of the Husband and of the Wife or ei=
Whereas on the other hand the fee simple of the said piece of 
there was no end of flogging to prevent the exercise 
so to be as aforesaid  , with power to appoint an umpire . 
Expressions are to indemnity , is for the sake of
or criminal  ( that is malicious )  Waste . For al=
should call for such a sacrifice . 
that is whether it be valuable to any particular person or per= 
 : mer is susceptible of direct proof . But this is not the case 
called upon to  " make his arrangements "  he had accord-
But all states are more or less in a state of real  <gap/>   . If a
seems no reason to be given why it should be greater
as well settled , as steadily pursued , as well known
9
at least the only cause which it was found convenient to 
Coin . It may happen that but a few are in this case ; but 
C
6
 : tery with a married Woman his punishment shall be as
 In Sweden there is but a small quantity of the precious metal in
under such conditions as his Majesty shall direct , who being 
in this case there is no deceit nor disappointment . It is a joint 
 " marine detachment )  at George ' s river , so effectually , that he died
for the first offence Six Months imprisonment ; for the Second 
might in either case serve equally to display your Helpless : 
supernumeraries be augmented again , so as to amount to two 
Art . 14 . Schoolmasters in sufficient number shall be 
Sect .
the laws of England , and under such regulations and
the above mentioned instruments and which are not necessary for 
Art.3 . And Whereas the Proposal of the said Je
2 .
 : pects to be counterfeit or materially diminished . A piece of Gold 
the prisoners consent not greater than the half 
take it up & follow him #
In a letter , which can hardly be a secret to you , I mentioned Mr Nepean
The Definition of Sir Edw . Coke  +  is plainly that of
of this humble , and as he thought innocent attempt , to sacrifice 
one . For years together , they had not so much as began to
same
are needed than in a question respecting the happening 
 " in the Husband "  ||  " to be disposed of at his Pleasure #
occasion to purchase . If then a Man in England , for example , 
consideration of the sum of twenty seven thousand 
58
-tuities and other deductions whatsoever and with interest in 
them .
-putable improvement , wherever necessary , but an 
Unhappiness in the Community but less than that 
 " in consequence of the last unproductive season , reduced those
between 
list of candidates .
9
Note
 " his musquet at them . This they laughed at , and said , that
in the way of administration . In the way of Legislation , by regulating
upon the whole . If the Coinage is renewed for instance every
it
Lords Commissioners and their Successors as follows . A compu- 
Constitutional Code - Laws ofof
Mr King , by whom the letter , containing the manifestation of
Majesty shall direct , who being so appointed thereunto shall
seems to have fallen into , by asking for Jail building
intended to mean nothing .
will should be concerned , it may be concerned in either 
-ticles at the said former period  ; whereupon he the 
A circumstance indeed which in this country contributes great=
Of Simple Personal Injuries .
aforesaid at his own expence cause to be erected and 
According to the account given by Captain Collins in the 
Destruction or Endamagement
himself Mr Ford will not think it unreasonable
in particular few are sufferers by it , but with their eyes open . By much 
The Punishment for non-registering should be capable . 
every one was disappointed ; for , owing to a most tedious and un-
- " gether with a Convict "   ( bondsman )  who had made a like attempt
express what is rather an accidental attribute of any Law , than
appointed such seizin and possession as aforesaid shall 
to counterfeit , that the Loss will be very inconsiderable . 
having been beloved by him as well as by You ,
they shall also by such Deputy or if thereto ordered or re-
reaps from the novelty of the image , the pleasure he reaps at the
grudgery of the money , if it were grudged , ought to 
them ; such as Relations within a certain degree and Servants .
 : sion of such severity in such a case is this :  that the putting 
Exposition
Consequence , if any ; in as much as it would 
public .
mons or order to go &c . A Justiciabilis eas , may be the 
compel others to join them . 
alone . It would therefore be a very mischievous measure to turn 
Of Frauds relative to the Coin . Reasons
seven hundred and ninety four and of his Majesty ' s 
character is his great trust and dependence and support
for the benefit of trade in general . Offences against the former
Of Incendiarism
kinds in the apparatus for the prevention of
upon the occasion , it only gives Mr Bentham 
which the offender was recently coveyed by Sea  ( whether that 
unmarried . In such case he shall only be made to
and the Commander an Accomplice with him .
7
French seems to answer to it exactly :  the originati=
your inattention if the whole of it together could pass 
all these cases what the Law has to do is to constitute 
Conception which is very necessary to a commanding 
P . 298 . Aug . 1800 .  " Several gentlemen being now preparing to return to England , 
are under its allegiance that our own state is commonly look= 
I suppose might
force  _  To what purpose a System 
of its existence .
or to the party in particular .
hecatomb , of victims was to be sacrificed , before an 
Children . 
For the case may be that you might be as much 
respect of any further supernumeraries which may successively 
of the former
 ' since his arrival in this country , availed himself of every
corrobora characterize these Characteristics . 
a coiner  _   _   _  to die in boiling hot oil or by any other
 " to the privileges of free men . Unfortunately , by some unaccountable 
change contrary to fundamental principles :  he cannot
would be a continual object of suspicion ; and with Such 
particular use here than with regard to such articles as are the pro=
occasion in the management of their concerns . Even 
on to save them from being seen to have a false one . That Clocks  _  
 " to be no longer consistent with his duty to continue the original 
for the purpose of his carrying on any of those honest oc=
up in the way in question without the using
whether the thing would have a Value although there were no agree=
12
Note .
Here then is an annuity of 9 for every Convict obtain-
Article 18 . Mr Bentham submits to Mr
-jured by such subsequent offence , and to be equal 
Our Author seems to have been led into this
fact of its being taken . As if a man going in to a 
 : nary price of labour . On this plan a man of the lowest Class which is the 
 [  ( D )  A Husband ]  The same Offence with relation to a Wife is
 " savage brutal dispostion would manifest itself whenever excited 
be distinguished in the first place into offences against a local class of
 : neral tendency of such regulations if it were only to justify the
to prejudice a foreign state in any other manner . It is 
worth while to detract from the simplicity of the Law for the
being intended to include all the charges attending the cus-
to be negligent about the money he accepts ; much more the per= 
with the most scrupulous attention . 
is to prevent the Judge from obtaining the knowledge he must possess ,
It is impossible that the former Expressions
to  " relinquishment "  , and the authority that pre-
-spondent has discovered himself to have become , on this or that 
 " to their own interest , which every man possessing common dis-
-ment , & certainly not a single engagement contracted , or profession made , 
and he shall pay nothing on the score of compensation .
a number of different sorts of food , and 
-tham and his Successors as a means of engaging
 : nable quantity of imprisonment should be substituted as 
 " severe corporal punishment , for having shot a native  ( man ) 
C
seized and possessed as aforesaid :  the value of such Buildings 
or member ; and provided the party do his utmost
genuine or entire , for which it is intended to be passed .
1 . If he be so rich that a sum which would be enough
upon an ignorant person for a Bank note or other Govern=
period 
Till an establishment of the sort is provid=
 : count . 
 : gestion or the false notion inculcated by the behav=
1 .
common
as aforesaid  :  provided that such allowance shall not begin to be- 
down before he gets open the door . 
a
-tive law , as well as to the repeal of a prohibitive law .  _  
3 . Mischief by Infants and Persons insane ,  ( under which lat=
money from Parliament , to ease his County from
-ing and its appurtenances , or in quality of provisions 
2 . The obligation you are under to assist a fellow creature
When the offence  , being of the nature of Theft or Rob= 
however the first person the idea of whom would 
hath within the said period undergone an enhancement 
above fixed , the same shall be settled by arbitration as above . 
It is not clear that in every one of the several titles of 
property in the island of Granada , or more generally 
to hard labour On a third offence four times that sum
 " they discovered a large body of natives , collected , no doubt , for the pur-
which might contribute to the subjecting an indi=
Of Indendiarism
 " a large body of natives all armed . On desiring them to inform
nature of the situation was at this same time received . The
successively be added to the one hundred , untill the number of 
Offences against the external Security of the State .
 : dered in the divission of the fortune .
Howard sunk under a jail fever , Neild has survived 
Theft , that Crime by which the Passion of all Passions the
time when , spontaneously or under instructions , a resolution is
be
to subsist :  he has only to confine himself to the proper bu=
Where there is no service to be done for the fee , or where 
are that are stolen by a sufferer by the Fire or not the Offender in 
years fourteen or seven years - the same extension was here
Remainder to any Assignee or Assignees of the said Sa-
work at no other than the few places at which such work 
Simple however as this is in the Mode & Principle
Under Mr Pitt ' s system , they have been almost without
when
presentative only :  that is whether it be valuable only as a means
eve every body then came the general promise to those 
ground will when purchased be according to the provision of the 
his said Successors shall respectively be made Debtors in their
 " a second or third hand . "   _  
of
With a Coiner the case is very different . The very talent which 
in the place here in question the quantity of room is less fully  <gap/> 
3 . It matters not whether the Value of it be natural , that is 
and least liable to Controversy . If not , let there be
 " the store keepers being most pointedly directed to give the 
-able the House of Commons by a Committee of the said House , 
 : ed not the concurrence of these circumstaces as a
7 .
Of Theft or Stealing .
Of Rape
it should seem without exception ,  _  such was purposely the profusion of 
No 7 Mr Hiley Addington to Mr Bentham . _ 
3
 " a great degree of inconvenience ... . 
so appointed thereunto shall have the care , management , 
the same to be occupied and enjoy ' d by the Devisee or
in trust to permit the same to be occupied and enjoyed by the
 : dice upon as high a footing as an act of the same sort
23
obtainment , exhibiting the same idea by a single
 : feit trash , it will be clear that he does it with his eyes open :  it 
pay
C
 ' inconveniencies which are sustained in this distant part 
to be , Government would have got an annuity of
they know not very well how to help themselves :  the
in New South Wales .
the rate of five per cent per annum for every such day , if 
a man a subject may possess as much influence over him 
Felon shall so have been convicted of divers felonies , the sums 
In conclusion , my Lord , I am inclined to think Your
he lived for , would any prudent man have an
is a matter which it is evident will be liable to receive a
still higher to Paramatta ?  The more arduous the
Having for a Moment introduced the Mention of
 " belonged to the Wife is by Marriage absolutely vested
or information ; or 2.ly By the production of things on which
Tearing alliances asunder and foreign family affections into
the Law relative to things found .
occupied therewith And in default of such Feoffee so 
practice that seems to have the remotest tendency to weaken either
 [  ( I )  Amenable ]  A man may be said to intend not to be amenable
between 1/6 and 1/5 of the whole number , as appears
 : self is conscious , is concerned  in obtaining  money
as stopped . But when the authority came for stopping 
is that they have no meaning ; that our Author seems to have depended
effectual . And if he assert that , 
-isions which precede it . It is neither more nor less than one great 
his Majesty , wherefore it is therein moreover provided 
necessary :  occupation , profitable or at least innocent , 
of the person in question ; or by marriage , for instance , by passing
one or other of that formidable list of physical forces that the
penitentiary discipline . Of this salutary discipline , 
Dispensing Power
or intermediately by documents addressed to persons acting 
conveyed to any such purposes . 
The said Jeremy Bentham , for and in considera-
N . 11  ( p . 268 )  19th February 1792 . The sincerity of the assurance
embezzled it . had he known at the time he picked it 
-less , and perhaps as to the charge of being un-
Extenuation Excuse I . Adulteress a Prostitute . 
the offender to do mischief to so great an amount
by which alone , laws may be determined to 
to see the day , & that so early a one , in which by a document
nor would it be a pleasant situation for him to 
for fear of  " their being neglected . "  - Such is the energy
 " as would give them a passage "  . - Such was the communication ,
16
The
by
their labour , taking on himself the whole expence 
to 
In these home instances the grand misfortune 
regarding . As if it be lying on the ground by
C
this purpose .
 ' Majesty ' s Colonies or Plantations in America , for the preventing 
any current money . 
N . 12  ( p . 283 )  24th April 1793 . A second opportunity for ma-
Polygamy together they shall be punished in a heavier degree
 : rent member .
 ( Copy ) 
 ( a troublesome and unpleasant business on both sides )  
which are brought together by the Author of
to
same thing . As it happens it is otherwise :  And so I leave them . 
will not perform such service unless such a fee be given him
criminating circumstances concur )  be acts of Theft . 
severities to set their hands to labour . N.B . There is
14
it was in vain to expect that any regard would be paid to the professions
To be copied
the very punishment that marks his crime will certify 
Ford ' s Proposal in regard to the excluding out of
has thus run full upon it ?   _  Step in once more ,
marketable nature , yet owing to particular exigencies it possesses 
 : sation .
4 . It matters not whether the Value of it be intrinsic ; that is 
Theory has been spoken of  _ now comes experi-
article in question forms a part , is considerably prior 
is it not pursued still without deviation , pursued 
 : ter . ]  But this distinction  , however real , is too subtle to be gene :  
that he intends to be amenable . He intends
of title would be the being obliged to pay the 
P.31 - April 1797 . The natives at the Hawkesbury were at this 
-mination in question , or at any rate the ex-
 : siness of a silversmith or a button maker . On such a per=
should such felon have been one full year under the care of such 
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
A caution to the Legislator _  This title is a very ample one , as 
2
12
Sensible of the Difficulty and Delicacy of the Task , 
2 . Another circumstance that contributes in a con= 
within one year from his obtaining full and peaceable pos- 
any one who chooses it may , for as long as he lives 
cannot be understood . It is proper therefore that the pensioner should
any 
to expose him to the present trend of the resistance 
12 ) 
any single person will hardly countervail .
persons concerned in those Offences some , indeed a great 
1 .
Let the stake for instance depend upon the
3 . It must be received in circulation  _ 
5 . It matters not whether it be valuable 
 " them to comprehend the nature of these doubts , it was to be
case the upper line of the two will serve for the Town , the other
C
-strain , but to direct , the original impulses of 
Agent of the Charity for the relief of debtors , travelled 
the something in question is to be done to him , a sum :  
be due on account of any other personal injury by him or her
without further discussion , sensible to the obliging
from
Of Adultery .
-ever he shall have fulfilled the present agreement in relation 
2 .
 " account , in the computation of the deaths so to
whole exceed the several utmost sums respectively above limited 
If however they are of too perishable a nature to be 
Of Defraudment
a state of constant cleanliness  ; clean sheeting or blanketing being 
pretence accordingly made use of as a ground and reason
C
respective Counties cannot contain , from the time of their receiving 
upon it . In the mean time having been repeatedly
off from government & throw them upon the Counties .
answer make to all such questions as shall be put to them 
indeed that his defence even in this case will be suc=
King ' s proclamation in Granada ]  which perhaps may be very 
without humbling ourselves for the present with any 
time appear with proposals and designs of amity . A=
12
2nd To keep them clad in a state of tightness and neat-
 " the lives of so many of these people should have been taken , no other 
proportion as they are beneficial to the foreign state may be pre=
ments .
of it , under Your Lordship to this day . He nurses
exercise of it might be laid under certain restrictions  . For in= 
Such is the deplorable laxness of mankind , such the abject hommage
would be graciously pleased to appoint the said 
fitting up and stocking the said Establishment  ; all which 
of Justification . 
 " and coming out at the belly , close to the navel...... . 
it seems material that in one part at least of the Note the Date
estate Now therefore it is hereby declared and agreed
From p . 10 positive
and habits  ( the habit for instance of relying in some degree on men ' s 
With mercantile Frauds the Case is different . Of the 
be increased . 
it
administer ' d to them respectively by the Hand of 
having no right  ( A )  so to do , and knowing that he hath
 : medy will either be inefficacious or unprofitable . +  Unless the Law 
to the government to determine whether it shall give leave . As
powers and allowances as are hereinafter mentioned , with 
 : ther , no more than what almost any man might do with= 
accident have happened to be blown out at a window :  merely
the Prisoners is interested therein  :  and moreover that 
made distinctions where there is no 
 : cerned in occasioning bodily pain or uneasiness in another by
that bad half-pence are often taken knowingly , even when good ones 
Art . 21 . To keep the management of the said intended 
-vention of disease  _  affording working room  _  affording 
own authority in parliament , he cannot make any new
of the late harvest , as a temporary relief to those who had suffered by that
some indefinitely distant Title with a Qualification
Fel Fields . Cold Bath Fields proved bad ground :  Battersea 
composition of the  " utility "  of this  " settlement "  the  " circumstances of
entitled to refuse giving such a Decision , even if
5
 " Law "  our Author begins with telling us ,  " in it ' s most general and 
exemplified  _ 
=diarism and Inundation . These will be treated of in form , each 
S d
Every encouragement was given to the curing of pork upon Norfolk Island ;
Offences against an ideal class of persons , or in other words offences a=
-sioners shall humbly recommend to his Majesty that he would 
two
 (   )  Collins p . 74 July 1789 . Notwithstanding that little more than
 ' or in scenes of dissipation which must eventually end in
on the part of the said Jeremy Bentham or his 
wages of labour , as compared with the expence of 
And Whereas the Proposal of the said Jeremy 
intended Managers the encouragements necessary to induce them 
proper , be kept under the inspection of any person or number 
apearances , yielding something to their professions , believing in part what they 
Definition , when it has any , to explain , is ,
- the same  ; or at least so nearly alike  , that it seems to be hardly
husband .
To enable this Paper to answer the expectations that have been
in consequence whereof the effective power of the said proposed 
in of the crop . 
C
respectively , for such time and under such conditions as his 
of military necessity . See Martial Law :  
 " the necessity of adding to the ordinary Charges of the Prison ; 
of the said Penitentiary House or Houses  , to continue in 
C
There are two Terms employed and that often 
practising Theft , he will have nothing left for it but to 
2 . The primary mischief is just the same . It may appear
Our author sets out by defining law 
5
the said Buildings Improvements and Personal Estate _  
-nal number of 1000 Convicts in manner hereinaftermentioned
1 . He shall be punished ignominiously and afflictively with the
Separation however , even though carried to 
or inconvenience to himself that is worth regarding .
denial is to perpetuate the miseries of war .
 " repugnant to the punishment of death , & incline rather to doubt
C
what would attach upon the same acts if committed 
then the addition shall not be paid in respect of any fur-
take expedition money for diligence employed out of the office
for and during the natural life of him the said Jeremy 
two persons competent in the highest degree to do the 
several sorts of provisions .
 [  ( A )  Concerned ]  See Tit . Of Co-offenders . 
 : cer of Justice , or by a person at large ; and if by a per-
upon the particular connections between the several states 
however according to the only notion that can be assigned
under the eye of Justice , it is hereby also agreed that the said 
course be different , according to the different calamities which
 ( E ) 
the party injured he would serve him in that very man-
 ( A ) 
128 . L . 10 ff , h . t . The roots of this tree it should seem were of use by
now be had  ( say )  for 100,000 . But for one reason
 ( B ) 
to accept it , and somebody else to give it him . It is 
and appearing in manner therein mentioned fit so to be removed , 
 " time very troublesome , burning a dwelling house and a stack 
House in and by means of which said Building any num-
1 . Of whatever nature a Pleasure be ; a pleasure of the Body , or a Plea-
-provements and Stock were not to be the property of the said 
some measure too those of peace . It is very fit the people 
amongst potentates about crushing worms may be 
and Personal Estate _ Now therefore it is hereby declared and 
to possess a Value ; as a common Pebble or piece of Stick at the time 
shall continue to touch any Part of any Thing which
the other by Mr B ' s Representatives , with 
 : fence is considered here only upon the footing of an injury to the
The publicity which for the benefit of the service 
that  " the utterers often are the Coiners or in confederacy with them "  ; 
-pointed In this there is not much to wonder at . But it is not
 : jury done to him ; and in any point of view it is as much 
without profit , during the season of primaeval 
1794 the said Lords Commissioners shall humbly recommend 
remainders as are also hereinafter mentioned  , shall , with 
two years , to give them to Mr Bentham rather
Defamation when thus embellished is called Satire . Sa : 
be paid to any person or persons in whose favour a Certificate 
Details , I must be content to refer myself to the
Such I conceive to be the Laws against swearing . In
Art.8 . Each Prisoner shall be kept properly cloathed , & 
reprieved during pleasure or under sentence of transportation 
 ' have been made , and are still in force , within several of his 
and for the encouragement of Same to enter into his 
In this view he proposes the article to stand
Principal Secretary  _  by whom the letter was signed ; in as 
It will of course therefore give him the same degree of
The time it lasts , is either long or short ; hence we have to speak of its  _  
attended with correspondent burthens to Mr Ben-
 : ency to Simple Personal Injuries . Tit . IV . Of Threats relative 
meat or the equivalent thereof as aforesaid shall
Letter 3d 
the amount of such enhancement as aforesaid :  
least innocent ones , and by that repletion to 
-tham ' s instance from what would otherwise have been
Instructions to the Judge . X
upon
above )  such as should be desirous of returning to England were
has  " examined "  the said Acts  _  and that he  " understands the 
such custody shall feed and cloth such offender and shall keep 
and another when at amity it has been the custom to 
For he who cheating in the quantity of quality of goods 
It indicates , as we have seen ,  +  the 
C
but the conviction is not made to depend in any manner upon 
 : ness for a livelyhood .
get off counterfeit domestic Coin , he will not counterfeit do=
N . S . Wales
and his face towards the horses tail . In this plight he
 " resort to , but the law of nature :  being the 
attempted giving Your Lordship on the present 
of the economy  _  one great drawback and than an 
 : ing out of a window . 
natural life with the same powers as those which his Ma-
the party or parties damnified by such felony , encreasing 
-jesty shall direct , who being so appointed thereunto shall have the 
-stance and the number be reduced to one hundred , 
of the Parliamentary sceptre , twice imprinted , and still so fresh 
in other Words )  whether the presence of this Consciousness
an acute and interested Examination of the subsisting
in which the negotiation began , or to declarations which occurred in the course 
The Title proposed by Mr . Bentham of 
ib .
has been guilty of another illegal exercise of legislative power , 
of time cannot of himself turn to any thing . His habits of Skill 
61
said including
of Justice , or without such authority . 
require a considerable length of time to accomplish that effect : 
shall have been discharged . 
to complain . 
of dry vegetables , as Timber , Corn or Grass ,
in point of duration to the
 [  ( B )  Concerned ]  See Tit .  [ Co-Offenders ] 
13 .
from his lawful occupation :  nor can a man carry on the frau=
-self be a fit person to be employed in the appli-
Author ' s assertion that man must 
 [  ( B )  Law ]  See Excuse II
C
what it is now giving to Mr Campbell , and 
C
There remains the relieving my character from the official imputations already 
as 
In 
authority , if , in a word , he either applies to any such piece a do=
Let the mischief threatened be ever so great , if it 
much as to pretend to give him leave to exercise . The impropriety
Thus , in an inferior hot-bed , an immature
as much at home in  " improved "  prisons as 
not herein and hereby made to the contrary take possession of the
C
to some other :  but to settle the explanatory Aphorisms
Import of a Phrase , little by little Opportunities
more out of sight than in the Cases of Theft and Sharping :  
Sect . I . Law in General .  ( 1
if
be limited And Whereas in and by an Instrument dated 
by the Executor or Executors Administrator or Administrators 
-val of prisoners in certain cases  , and for other purposes therein 
relationship is :  whether natural by passing for the Son or Daughter
to call him to account . As if a man takes it before your
-tained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwith 
I . Articles to be performed on the part of Government . 
compleat neglect shown to the only persons by whom
 " being issued in lieu of five , and five pounds of port in lieu 
of July 1794 it is enacted that when the said Penitentiary 
 : tance and knowing him to be deaf , throw a stick at him 
each year out of the said number of a thousand Prisoners 
1
Bentham under the powers of the said Act might if some pro-
This information should have been to him either directly ,
been done years ago , & neither the worthy Magistrate nor so 
that 
C
 " the express consent and order of the Governor "  was found to be
I understand the objects of those Acts to be , that such
truce . 
8th . To conver the prison into a school , and by 
 " tulit , nihil est crudelius , nihil perni-
for the effectual transportation of Felons and other Offenders & 
 " good advice ; and assured them , that he had already , from his
 [  ( E )  Advantages ]  To wit on the part of the Ward , the Advantage
 : ment ,  ( that is to say any assertion contained therein )  be false
-ions limitations and restrictions as his Majesty shall un-
frauds committed on one sort of metal used as Coin :  and 
-ment within England and Wales as his Majesty shall ap-
into a Negotiation with England .
Turned back in a Circle , instead of the
6 Those of Adults over Infants in the same Family . See ib . 
-posed to be erected by Mr Bentham , is intended to accommo-
But why  ( I hear Your Lordship say )  all these idle allusions ?  
is a fact which it is highly necessary should be as :  
 " sentence till an opportunity may offer for their
of each particular Case without any more explicit 
Reasons
which I now proceed to submitt to a pair of Noble 
of it it shews how far any such illegal punishment 
a partial allowance towards the same the bulk of the ex-
Report , exhibiting in detail the whole state , moral and me-
Justification III .
difficult through all the cares to which it may be applied , 
=ment exceeding that term in whipping at the rate of not
pledge of his future good behaviour with respect to offences 
of all such instruments may be prohibited  ( giving proper no= 
38
actually consumed within the said period of a year together with 
The auxiliary expedients that may be employed 
to be preferred , from which,in Pursuit of the Spirit ,
time beyond dispute in a certain place : - Duty there has 
was from being necessary even to this illegal purpose 
 " found . Going immediately in search of them , he fell in with
him to be provided with a short answer such as 
of the annual produce of that Tax for the portions of 
 : sons falsely pretends himself or another to stand in that degree of re=
the settlement , and the only chance it has of contributing any
It may be of use however to take a cursory view of the ge= 
might do more towards disturbing the peace of families
But this presumption may be defeated by
 : late their oaths of Office and thereby incur the guilt of a kind of 
and employment of the said original number 
3 . A man is always punishable for withholding his assis : 
note of hand for such or such a sum of money from a pri=
the desserter lived concealed so also may he die . 
3 . If he had probable reason for believing her to be 
person can effect it . The seals of the fountain of
If an Offender thinks he can get off counterfeit foreign Coin 
It has been combated in various nations , with much  <gap/>  and
gave it , that  " not many "  would ever receive the benefit of it .  _  
 " and every thing that they had with them . He threatened
worth
remains contributory to its well-being and subject to its 
that Mr Bentham ' s Representatives should be
an object to me  _  one great obstacle to this end 
the Consent of the Owner expressed or to be implied , 
 " the clause .. . in the chapter party "  for preventing Shipmasters from 
whole ; insomuch that the said Jeremy Bentham , whensoever 
of cleanliness  [ scarce any where conjoined with li-
It is that which we are here left utterly to 
same length of cohabitation the power of pleasing the oppo=
C
Law in General .  ( 5
13.th To insure to them a livelihood at the expira-
C
relief .
only be punished criminally as for defaming the Jewish Sect ; but
they were not employed .
=ing : 
months salt provisions remaining ; which , without this supply would
C
cause to be erected and adapted to the said purpose a 
 " benefit , which he hoped in due time would be attended to  _  
Man under such Circumstances to Punishment
It is much less painful therefore for a servant to digest an
of others . If obtained from others , it must be obtained ei :  
differences in the sum total of the severity with which these 
Successors the other by the person or persons so seized and pos-
The crowding plan  _  the plan so distinctly chalked out 
4 . Where the number of days which the Offender would have
been appropriated to the purpose of a Penitentiary 
 " season . He also permitted a certain quantity of the wine & spirits 
 : pose . ( a )  
do his endeavours to meet Mr Ford ' s ideas
or
a letter from to his Grace to the Treasury dated
more particular perhaps than any that have been given as
Letter 2d or 3 
-venth day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand 
the general consequences of the obnoxious habit . See Quest V . 
to their liberty of departure , before the month of August 1792 :  being
self-crimination and self-depredation , the maxim 
persons intitled to take out Administration to the 
not in Confederacy # to take it up & carry it off as
know when I say a Windmill , I mean a goose . "  I fear ma-
 a Chaplain , Surgeon , Taskmaster or Schoolmaster and such other
the faith and so forth :  and in the year of our Lord one 
provision
article of common property which is in question . The distinction
Quest . II  . Why foreign Coin is put upon the same 
a comparative statement of the prices at the two 
 : gency which occasioned the demand is at an end :  that exigency over ; the 
for instance
 " oversight , the papers necessary to ascertain these particulars had been 
any of the kinds now under consideration . Now the more
inaccurate use of the term law , by a servile
Reservation it is also true . I then begin to ask
that the punishment shall outweigh the profit 
on the part and behalf of his Majesty of the one part and 
and carried them down into the Hall , that a Man
 " course could possibly be pursued ; for it was their custom , when 
transported or by the expiration of his term shall be entitled to his 
certainty at least , without asking :  accordingly he 
Trunk and laid it at on the Floor had severally so
crimes - such is the energy with which the Duke
to make them ; especially when the Deed which 
of Forgery . The profit arises from the difference in point of
 " of nature and of nations . And it is that rule of action , which 
management . As far as my opportunities of ob-
1
amount thereof to be determined by two referees , to be
i.e . creating a new Obligation or enforcing an old
there be certain times of the day in which the 
a general reformation of that species of Coin  . The Coin being then fresh 
in other cases . For Insolvency thus circumstanced there would 
-tural means , and the use made of them in the 
have been more than half killed off  _  he keeps
any , during which the same shall have continued respec-
Case without any such Direction would induce great
In both these instances indeed , it may be said that gener=
corruption of so many years would come pouring into the
10 .
evidence of the intention to produce it .
I hear no more of him . Much Consolation
Jeremy Bentham and his Representatives shall at any time and 
 ( A ) 
pretence or other he renews his Application  _  By
so great a mortification . If the case is that he
For a Simple Personal Injury the Offender ' s Punish : 
-come due untill one year after the day when 
and within a time to be limited , And Whereas in and by an 
medical advice .
might be kept under several keys of which an officer , to 
 : son of another . To determine that question with respect to 
3 . Those of a Schoolmaster over his Scholar . See Law of School
 " since which he had been a most active enemy to the settlers , 
flowing from both these sources .
it is not in any sensible degree diminished nor consequently 
which is more or less attended to in every civilized State . In Towns ,
bringing them to New South Wales , left them , or pretended to 
but upon such terms and conditions and for such considera-
No
6 .
 ( A )   ( B )   ( C )   ( D
2 . Every personal Insult is a personal Injury or an attempt
the same such Overseer shall during the term have the powers 
duration .
This End may be said to be answer ' d in an ordi- 
different light . A proposition that seems to be 
were kept in bondage . The papers  ( it is said )  had been delivered
of deaths expected to have taken place at the end of the year 
partly
Of Excuses Extenuations
=prize he had got the owner ' s leave to mount on its
I can speak with a little more certainty as to what it means a 
mischief , though extensive , is not so great as one would imagine and the 
to take it off the Counties !  The Counties did I
for none but his own it will be material that no name be
not from the particular consequences of any single Act , but from 
 : ing it in England for English money with some person who 
a question altogether immaterial with a view to practice . If 
obtain of the matter , he cannot consent willingly
Note
Note .
 _  such authority being given in the express view , of making
Among the amusements of early years , did it ever happen to
having recourse to the protection of the Law :  but when the 
 ( the Endeavour and the Fancy )  had been near an hundred  +  :  
Are the same as in Personal Insults  :  which See . 
appoint Now therefore it is further agreed that in pursuance 
-conduct . As to custom , it affords one assurance of pro=
paying him at the rate of not less than 1S a day exclusive of 
 " him what was become of the white men , they told him they
might be divided between the adverse party and the fisc accord=
were
idea of such influx of something that can scarce fail
5 . Collapsion , i.e . the fall of Buildings or other large masses of
Jeremy Bentham and his Successors as a means of enga-
12
& while the
for instance or by signs or gestures nor if in dis=
were
Annuity for the life of such Prisoner the com
nominally  [ the same  ]  would in reality be much greater to the lat : 
made up so easily :  a hecatomb , and more than a 
Friendship between the gentleman who popp ' d out 
6 .
 " away any Convicts or other persons from the settlement without 
idea that is meant to be typified is that of
prevail , would naturally be presumed , unless it
 " or shewing the least gratitude for the attentions which he received ,
 [  ( B ) Concerned ]  See Til :   [ Of Associates in Delinquency ] 
8 3
the  " spirit of improvement "  manifested by there
were I even used to search , could I expect to find
Instructions to the Legislator .  _  Analytical View .
 : tions of the one ought to be copied as closely as may 
C
2
ruined by the following of it :  and tho '  what is
promote
many other people would have been left at this time of day 
tax for architecture they may stand excused from load-
5th In the Intention of making it
 : cunda , reliquus :  tertia , glans penis : 
destruction
 : though in the most obvious sense of the phrase
Phrases , as , seeming at first Sight to answer
the hair of your deceased wife or mistress . You
as they might and aught to be . In the expository part in
if any thing that can be said of Law in general , that is of all Laws 
 ( and when I say the king , I always mean the king , without
mortality was very considerable at first as appears
-ment of the prison itself is such , as renders it impossible
no distrust .  _  
Note on the word  [ Takes ] 
and for the reasons given by Mr Ford .
the exercise is limited to a certain place , or any public
to warrant him in defeating  _  and defeating accordingly  _  the 
and stocking of the same , may reasonably be computed to 
Penitentiary House and even make amends in most instances 
a year to that of persons living at the commencement of the 
84
of use with respect to any particular species of Coin immediately after 
1 . Taking without leave of the government a pension or present from 
the reach or knowledge of the other . Such a breach of the marriage
 " had used every means in his power to remove and relieve 
make by the offence or for a second offence by being confi : 
C
 : en to some ; it is capriciously denied to others . The object being 
in Lege ponere est arduum , omittere exitiosum
deemed not worth regarding , if it be such a sort of 
irrational agency of an infant or ideot or a madman can
The offence of sinking or wrecking any nav=
 : tice it seems to be only for the conduct of such persons as 
Theft . But what difference would there have been in these 
considering it as responsible for all persons who are in any 
of mere indigence :  since while he possesses it he is enabled 
ships were two . On another occasion in Nov . 1794 it appears
punished he is enjoined to do something , as to keep 
I wish for ) might be apt to object to me as
Road the Highway man has taken , and desire 
 ' until very lately been known to have an existence , the governor
such felon shall have been under the care of the said intend-
any other Art , such instruments may be prohibited in like 
Definition sought for , you have still put upon
spoon upon the Table and without calling for any thing 
to Law .
window . Having occasion for a piece of paper he 
acceded to :  not a syllable , so much as hinted , about
producing asort of a stare  _   " Ah "  says he ,  " but you are to 
Where any of the above Excuses takes place the Adulteress 
91
always in the eye of any official person , to whom 
15th . To present to the Court of King ' s Bench on a 
 : sequence of the Inundation .
natural
 : ral choose rather to run something of a hazard , than 
cast of a die . One fact which is presumed between
3 . With regard to the Composition . If any particular compositi= 
7 .
answer their purpose in a degree more or less perfect ac=
-eties . 
Offences against the external Security of the State
-plemental allowance as is herein also mentioned , as also in 
disposition as that of promoting the object of the Act ?  - 
-tentiary House or Houses , to continue in such office or offices 
 : houses :  in the way of legislation , by penalties annexed to such prac=
 : tinguished and what others of have left unnoticed that
to have been manifested without cogent reasons  _  the
In settling the Law relative to this and the preceding
of which the limits are so uncertain more witnesses 
the concurrence of parliament )  has a power to alter the old
it to pass for any thing but what it purports to be .
The same power should for the like reasons be reserv=
Plantations , has no privilege distinct from the natives . 
play , subjects himself to forfeit the stake in
 " of them would , on their return , refrain from the vices , or avoid 
if two hundred supernumeraries be committed in the first instance , 
remained single , must be deducted .
Of Simple Mercantile Defraudment
accepted of the office would not be known , to a 
and be answerable for any escape of such offender , and also during 
he will counterfeit foreign Coin ; if he does not think he can 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
unus , vice castrationis circumciditor ; si neque preputium sit ,
are as follows . _ 
 : ventional only , that is whether it derives its value only from
for the reception of the said number of Convicts , three weeks 
proof :  and in the class of Traders are included persons of 
requires the political power as well as Scientific contrivance of
-ed Penitentiary House or Houses when erected  , with their ap-
See Tit :   [ Criminal Inundation ]  
that the exclusion should be suspended for the first
C
period continue to be made unto the person or persons so seized 
-bour such Convicts as are therein also described , and 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
personal injuries , personal insults , personal threats , for=
 ' their complete ruin . He desires that they will persevere with 
number of other persons is , to whom by means of such 
Another thing is , that in proportion as the Coin is of the
not add to the County rates the worthy Magistrate ' s own imagination 
instance where the service is of a new kind , what the skill and 
constitutes perhaps the most immediate and universal 
his
I must leave to the Reader to determine , thus  _  
This is what may be very true . But what we are the wiser for it ,
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
-ding or Buildings adjoining , a Chapel fit for the use of 
 " any injury done to their persons or property , according to the
Philadelphia
cause a man is concerned in kindling fire , there=
the force of incitements which are apt to be so
the said purpose , in which said Building or in some Buil- 
and ordain laws , statutes , and ordinances , for the public
Of Frauds relative to the Coin .
will most assuredly be committed . Where gain is the subject
the Political Code .
6 . Inundation or Submersion .
penal code :  such a provision would hardly pay for its place in
reason to think requisite in order for a person in
irreparable
Theft then may be defined , The taking of a 
 : course whether by speech or writing or by any
before his face ; and therefore ought to be more severely
positive law must be superadded , not to re-
Fac-similes which are themselves counterfeits , being
of bad Money under such circumstances is looked upon as con= 
an account is given of his proceedings toward the people and govern-
such supernumerary . Provided that such addition , after ha-
there never been any such Colony as New South Wales .
of the laws of morality , as is sufficient to render the parties
C
must depend upon the particular class in question . They are therefore
 [  ( H )  Forbears ]  As if a man being asleep by the fire-side his 
 " about armed , and heard to declare it was for the express
degree of danger . For , if the being seen to have two or three 
Whereas it is therein also provided that after the removal
Articles of Agreement , had , made , concluded and 
 : band according to the circumstances of the Parties .
in 
prevent
of any individual Prisoner on the day which delivered to his 
The expence of the Operation will certainly be something , 
The Punishment for extortion in an officer may be as 
under his care , taking thereby upon him the insu-
expiration of his legal terms of punishment , as before it . _  
there in defiance of the law .
With respect to the probably number of transportable Convicts , 
Inclosed space , for whatever purpose , is not 
2
for such person ' s private use . 
affected by the secondary mischief as if he were a native . 
 ( c ) 
the wishes , original or incidental , which France happened to entertain . 
Coin .
 " sanction of the governor for their return "  .  _  A promise was thus 
As to the mischief there would be in
is
Of Things found
6
would
when it is taken be a time at which it possesses or appears about 
more than
punishment ; and it indicates nothing else ,
were the child of the Husband , this is not Family Imposture .
2
of
3 .
as his Majesty  [ or three such Justices ]  shall by order 
to be rid , even at some hazard , of the delays and 
me :  rumour  _  notoriety  _  whatsoever be the word  _  
interest in case of arrear as aforesaid as also to appoint e-
his earnings to the amount of not less than one 
when lo !  by a misadventure , converted into his
exhilerating 
that for the sake of persons in authority as well as 
excepted . 
 [  ( A )  Man ]  Si famina masculaum ipso invito faminam ai carnali : 
same ship the Bellona . Into this ship had been received six
10
occupied the same observation is applicable to the designation of the
fire ; if it be a house in a town all per : 
Offender :  particularly if it be a Husband or Wife , Parent or Child ,
 : ficiently sensible to the outrage ; and it is the resent= 
the
the said
supernumerary . Provided that such addition  , after having been once 
6 .
equal , very much the reverse .
Brasiers , Pewterers &c . &c . In all these cases the damage
there is least likelihood to be a Necessity of disparity .
-ing Convicts it is provided among other things that 
in a tone of displeasure  _  )  and what of that  ?   _  as
In the former article the interests of Peace are provid=
Let him come forward then with his offer .
any number of persons may , in as far as it shall be thought 
ground .
But in such cases as where the mischief was done by
r
different species of Forgery :  the former list will be much 
expences together  , considering the usual and almost unavoi-
So if he do but accept it when offered 
those minute differences by which bad Coin is distinguishable
corroborate me "  . 
but 
c 
 : ther with their consent or without it . If with their 
here .
C
erring ?  and whither he would not find out the same sort of rules 
been
 : nities
on the other side the wainscoat has pulled the wirer  . 
a moderate and well-weighed portion of personal profit , upon the 
 [  ( D )  Value ]  1 . It matters not whether the Value be marketable , 
of them in common :  2ly For the sake of exhibiting the whole
may appear to him , not to be of a value worth 
human food , as much as he shall choose to eat ;
Panopticon is in every respect obviously 
No 15
any  <gap/>  person whatsoever in due execution
 : ware of .
they may prove prejudicial in one or more of the several ways in which 
6 . Acts which in a member of the foreign state would 
together with the People called Gypsies .
great men  _  Grudged !  however  ( says the voice and 
3rd To keep them supplied with separate beds and bed-
said Jeremy Bentham for himself his heirs Ex-
Agrees more or less with Bankers Paper and with 
C
single one of any of the preceding classes . 
System . Nal . 91 . 1 . ed . dec . Flora Suecica , III . The Hielm , called in Holland
as aforesaid , with an allowance annexed to the said office of 
once ; even if they were , as it might be known the instant the offence was
which results from the difference between the 
3 .
of , or person or persons intitled to take out Administration to , 
7
him to pursue . He asks me how he is to 
3 . Another reason against applying extraodinary punishment
originally assumed character of the genus slip insensibly out 
 , that of such & such a Subject Larceny cannot be committed ,
it is in danger of being confounded with is rather more than I
1
seems to be the only extraordinary expence that is of any ac=
his power has been thus abused , as his justice was to save from 
These Cases are indeed adduced by the practical
the bargain is still more advantageous to Government ,
or popular
three Days and then not returning it back to 
ere we could understand
 ' welfare he is extremely anxious . He therefore urges them not
 " of the party ; enquiring of him whether the governor was 
were to splash a man or scald him :  or if a horseman by
follow him .  _   _   _   _   _   _  
establishment shall be in readiness to receive the said Convicts 
the less formidable and efficatious . At any rate a 
 ' to be led away from their real interest , by speculative 
the sake of the intercourse carried on between one state 
first , shall be encreased by the reception of such latter supernu-
having been taken or detained by force or fraud for the pur=
the exigency in question from former times . Under the origi-
and sufficient Infirmary shall be included 
 : mons :  of  <gap/>  own accord or 2 . Upon Summons .
in the popular Code would have a mischievous
A personal insult is where a man is concerned in doing
Extenuation
to be had without expence . To pay for that 
John Bell .
-agement superintendence and controul of the same and 
 ( B ) towards
it is therein also provided that after the removal of 
the party deserted ought to have the power of taking into his
that of  " Child "  is mischievous .
 Counties .
to wit either upon a certain piece or pieces of 
3 . He shall be confined to hard Labour for a quarter of a 
These Solutions too are necessary in a multitude of Arts . 
The time which it will necessarily take him up 
 " been made of the natives , they were exceedingly troublesome to the 
regarding a man takes any thing else which possesses such a Value 
 : gent merit :  and an artificial arrangement of this sort would 
If the Expression instead of  " making it
occasion , to this orand that right honourable or otherwise dignified 
will or will not be of service upon the whole towards
me then my Lord , in pity tell me  _  by what submissions , if by any , 
swered for his non-acceptance ?  Yeer Year after
a certain time in a manner more or less public .
according to our Author ' s principles , 
for the relinquishment ;  _  such enhancement so produced
Next with regard to Sharping . It is not always that
be regarded in a light in the least degree less favourable .
proper and sufficient Infirmary shall be included . 
trouble of the officer appears to be fairly worth :  in the opinion
-chased for the purposes of the said Statute of the 7th of July 1794 
Matrimonial disturbance or disturbance of conjugal 
and a pecuniary punishment , and in aid of it imprisonment , 
doing to the offender as nearly as may be the same mis=
3 . Provisions monitory  ; or Provisions for putting the
2
of , but only the fullness of the Prison . The benefit of it is giv= 
one point then , does not the same wire which at 
No my Lord :  the improved and ever alike improving 
year of our Sovereign Lord George the 3rd , by the Grace of 
after mentioned . 
a motive , give birth in his Grace ' s mind to a determination 
Observations , on the Stat . sub regno Mariae  .
here at home in relation to the liberty in question appears  ( as far
Of Idleness
 : nary protection . Such reason may be derived either 1 . 
the said number of 1000 Prisoners :  and as he will be made 
 ( for instance )  is
direct or indirect 1st direct ; the Energy of the Taker
The Word Larceny has its Import coextensive only
2 . 
 ' have so effectually ruined many of the most forward & promising 
The establishment or non establishment of paper money in 
engage such Prisoner as an hired servant by the 
were
H . 8 . C . 13 ]  making it penal to keep above 2000 Sheep .
to the temptation of which the same person is apt to be exposed . 
purpose certain obstacles should be purposely thrown in 
while does it become to a person under temptation 
 [  ( E )  Farther ]  If any farther Personal Injury be occasioned , it
instrument dated this day the said piece of ground has been 
Where the husband brought a capital into the com=
and to introduce new laws in a conquered country , this
the mischief it is likely to produce . A man in this
-tation shall be formed of the number of deaths 
6
tell
B
punished .
wards for services rendered to all mankind . But all Sovereigns are not either
to
Dispensing Power
your adversary was to expose You to contempt :  as if the 
for a limited time . If only for a limited time , it is theft to the
no , depends upon the greater or less scrupulousness
 : troduced into the process so as to be necessary to the giving the 
 : dying a temporary inconvenience . In this case if proper measures
amenable , if it was before the owner ' s face that it
and of good fame in point of chastity ; saving always what may
1 .
The ignominious punishment above appointed
concealed from the knowledge of the Judge , or not to conform to that
 : ed that a person of common humanity and civility would give to a : 
Of the nature and scope of provisions against 
some Reason or other the Author hath holden
after the decease of the Survivor of the said Jeremy and Samuel 
by the injury from such felony , except that the same shall 
4 . If he takes it trusting to the party ' s not being able
59
ought to be made to her .
not less than one week nor more than four .  +  +  ]  
The most common case is that in which neither party had
7
of erecting Penitentiary Houses fit for the reception of 900 
 : rent there will not be so much gold or Silver in currency ; no man 
taken place . Provided that if one such felon shall so have 
exercise of , a dispensing power , by advancing positions tending 
account of municipal law , it may be proper 
 : rily which he ought to have been compelled to make in the 
any expence that is more necessary , or which the state can 
name of Idleness . 
adopted to fix the sense of one of them , an Inconvenience
The inserting Aphorisms concerning them
of the suit in question . 
very noses  _   ( the term is a coarse one  _  under the
as witnesses . For in a question so open to difference of 
as follows :  
-ment  ; all which expences together  , considering the usual and 
ceived without them .
apprized of the number of Convicts , which the Panopticon pro-
C
Art . 17 . In case of escape the said Jeremy Bentham &
measures to prevent his being known :  as if he wraps himself
itself :  but the special damage , if there is any , falls upon individu=
A man who cannot read going by a dwelling 
On this untoward occasion , what is there that
addition of freight , insurance , &c . They saw the wants of the
 : ed upon as responsible . Not but there might be reason for 
navigable Vessel , or a growing Wood , a pile 
 : tive by doing something which he is enjoined to do :  
upon the said Land or any part thereof as for the moveable stock
was but natural )  that the inconvenience was , as such , 
security be debarred the faculty of purchasing for 
5 . The Prison shall be warmed in every part whenever the 
 : vided .
be found on a closer Inspection not to do so  _ 
19
masters and Scholars . 
this same plan while I was amusing myself with 
such a length of time  _  year after year  _  under the
 " purpose of spearing the governor whenever he saw him . "   _  
it offered to Sir Henry Mildmay ?   _  was it offered
as he knows is not lawful for him to take and receives such
 multitude 
number
Defraudment
If without Excuse an unmarried man commit Adul=
shall on the application of such Prisoner  ( he being able to
foreign state . These cases are the most common ; but there
 " 14th in every district of the colony , at which every labouring 
was a demand for it . The benefit produced by an extrao dinary
is to be left to the Jury , ( to whom I refer the Cognizance
 : perty of individuals ; it changes its nature and becomes 
3
by means of a duty thereon imposed by Parliament , 
nature , he would have furnished us with the 
Distinctions from this Offence , it is this before all 
who was to stretch his hands over the altar , and 
3 . Where it is given in order that the expedition may result
itself , or with other scraps of paper that are actu : 
Sharping on Fraudulent Obtainment . 
reformatory part of the management of the said intended 
 " who supported themselves to very great distress ; and several 
natural world :  and therefore that 
Economy
 ' must end in the ruin of many of the settlers , for whose 
1 . He may be fined 
58
upon You and You could not find a single person else 
notified thus in a manner 
sympathy with it , cried shame upon the monster with five 
taking the horse in this clandestine manner by sur=
living at the commencement of such year , taking for the
 " Gaols themselves "  might come to be  " neglected "  :  To a plain
the Word  " corroborate "  -  " corroborate "  ?  says the 
 [ not ] 
Letter 3d
guardianship of the Father , the females under that of the 
lodging washing and firing  :  1/3 of which allowance of 1S a day 
from the Necessity of giving some Name for an Idea 
use of . _ 
valuable consideration a premium which so many 
upon as being past or present ; or the probability of their
the Unhappiness produced by it therefore a mixt Mass
very highest . On this account it seems improper to subject 
 : becilliority in point of Sex . 5 . Weakness of the party injured . 6 .
not intended for it , speak of inconvenience , assume  ( as 
1 . Offences against Foreigners at large among which Piracy 
In this respect it bears some analogy to those offences 
something exclusive of those two Crimes , which it
that account it is made a ground of excuse only and not
a very obscure one indeed yet in all other points a spotless one  _  
any where with a sufficient quantity of genuine . 
never thinks of weighing , and very seldom of submitting to any other
by throwing water out of a window into a frequented street
the Wife for a time or forever . 
out of which he comes . - What are his other titles ? 
 ( a )   ( b ) 
10
viz :   " converting it to his own use "  which latter
of the memory , and a spurious one steal into it ' s place . But  _  
Precaution against Calamity . See Tit :   [ Justi=
power for them to choose an Umpire in case 
they are calculated to obviate . Till these regulations are
original agreement as above stated .
 : prehensiveness of the arrangement :  The limits of this division are 
 : pified by drugs or in a swoon . 
legislation being subordinate , that is , subordinate to his 
so appointed thereunto shall have the care , man-
of the premisses at and from the term of such decease then 
exert on certain objects in certain situations when sharpened by cold or im=
low price of the metal effectually secures it against any contrivance that 
only be practised upon a chance opportunity for the sake of 
stock is portable :  such for instance as
with the latter . It can be appraised no otherwise than by a 
or money ' s worth , intending not to be amenable
 : tune and occupation cannot , without being detected , circulate 
ions as oppressive and perfidious as they were illegal .
said Samuel Bentham of all benefit from the said Buildings
supposes too that the Creator has 
on the part of the said Jeremy Bentham  :  such 
definition Law must be something 
council , in like manner as the other islands belonging 
not a single act was done , which was not in violation of some engage-
Of Adultery .
house ]  in the Town . See Tit :  [ Justifications ]  
II . On the ground of precedent  _  
This is not the case with idleness :  since for a man to 
THEFT
standard the annual proportion of the sum total of deaths
Destruction or Endamagement .
The
Of Matrimonial Desertion .
*In this respect , at the worst not as bad as the Hulks :  nor yet a great
subjects should be extended , where it is wanted , to the indivi= 
of transportable and other Crimes .  _  
-mate . From such view as he has been able to
C
Then sometimes to mend the Matter comes
it would cost him to do the like injury to an ordinary 
refunding any part of the money :  Mr Bentham ' s
7
 : pens more frequently than people of the higher classes are a=
but I incline to think it would be very inexpedient to move 
the fair side  _  the amiable  _  the friendly side of the 
I am &c  _ 
conceive they are reducible to one of these 4 viz : 
Pretends to have examined the Acts  _  puts a groundless interpretation on 
Any thing done to a man ' s person by a Judge or 
made to cow cowe cover this and every thing else 
of uttering bad Gold and Silver Coin and that of uttering bad Cop=
in Telemachus be re-exhibited in the Island of New South Wales , 
 " of being brought out and deposited in the colony ; and as , thus situated , 
Houses shall be erected in pursuance of  , and according to , such 
 : ed or no . 
Of Defraudment
 _  the barbarity & consequent mortality )  to have pre-
25
 " to burn the crops as soon as it could be effected . Fire , in
 " own ideas , offered a plan to the secretary of state for their
for the Rape ; unless the party ravished be a female unmarried
done in such quantity and such quality , as to 
 " of the amelioration of our penallaws  _ 
description on board the Hulks , is among the modes of pu-
and not suspecting it be of value worth regarding
Linn . Iter
departure to all accompanied with a secret intention of 
4 . If it should be of too much use to be sacrificed still the exer=
been here
Excuse III .
 : fence .
breadth and thickness . They constantly belong to it :  it cannot be con-
the punishment might be the same as where it was fraudulent 
 " discover some appearances of amendment .
 " to the store at the established price , had now refused it , when 
the Man you are to apprehend . Must not 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
 : valent quantity of any other kind of property , he can 
 if where reformation is at stake expence would be
agreed upon this day of in the thirty fifth 
 " which compacts , we have no other rule to  _  
 " Games Whitsun Ales & Morris dauncing & the setting
in particular  ( Oxfordshire I have but an indistinct 
offender under sentence of death but reprieved during pleasure 
kind of mischief . There is in short but one case in which he can 
of current money or an ordinary Article of food  :  or confined only :  
to strike a sort of horror into every breast that thinks of it .
 " but , their clamour increasing , he fired , and four of them fell , one
 : tating the lawful Coin . 
2
different
 : son who is to pay , about the money which he offers . The only 
2 . If there be any instruments necessary for the making of 
a new invented system of machinery  , which , though 
be but foreseen to be likely to arise will operate as a 
reduction of the National Debt .  _  Taken from the Sale 
to be accompanied by proper vouchers for the proof as well of
exhaustive method like those of the other classes . The offences that ap :  
directed to such Overseer appoint now therefore it is 
the list of nuisances and crimes , can not nine years spent
supplemental allowance stipulated for as abovementioned  , 
of its Perpetration there is no Offence that has in many
Now carrying away must be from some place
47
number , probably the greater number , will be persons poss :  
and as much required to be so , as any other part
the object of this Letter of his to unco rowd of as many 
in one year from his obtaining full and peaceable pos-
check to which either strangers are not exposed . The most
 " with them upon amicable terms . "  
But would you then have had these living nuisances 
of the metal will serve to shew from whence they were taken . This 
Of Justifications .
The Nobel Lord and the gentleman on the other 
C
quer Bills , _  Differs from Stock Annuities  _  Agrees with 
opinion as the condition and quality of goods , a question 
or a punishment ; or to the State only as an Instrument which
conduct of his can in the way of provocation expose 
or by the expiration of his term shall be entitled to his liberty 
obliged to make some kind of pecuniary amends to the
great degree have parted with their integrity before they could 
into a Shop where he is not known or even where he is known ,
with Intent that another shall be chargeable on
together with a competent allowance of meat , or
6
not to be unmeaning , dark , ambiguous , fluctuating , narrow ,
C
his Successors shall at the end of each year be on the one 
enforced
 " of whom got up again and ran off , the other three remaining
limited . 
which
Architects of the expence of erecting Penitentiary Houses fit for 
the division of our 4th Class of Offences , Offences against Trade . 
rival Artist with whom he was at enmity .
there said is in Effect false , yet with a mental
 " would have a good effect ; and presumably , who had received seven 
what are called causes & effects in the 
or other  ( such as diminution in the number of
else it be :  that in that sense he should always use the word , & 
Estimation of the several particular Offences into 
government and the spirit of the Catholic religion and
Want of a regular market for purchasers .
provision for that purpose would hardly make up for the incon-
-cy  [ effects ]  of which we are endeavouring to continual
Exposition .
ous train of species have been displayed let the true that is the 
C
estate of such survivor as well for the value of the said Buildings
case of arrear as aforesaid as also to appoint every such successive 
of the Wife or both for a time or forever . 
name . It is not committed with the views , nor has it any of the
Had any of the professional men just spoken
C
within a week after receiving the admonition  ; cases of necessity 
C
thoughts were bent upon injustice . _  
 : ing . Men in general , feel , it should seem , that it is more 
easy to apprehend
C
1 . Laws relative to Householders in general .
-ther & by a general Act , but one County only &
against his will . here 1 . If the dog was not mad at
40
the distruction law and justice  _  this audacity  _  the offspring
such
Extracts from the case of Campbell v . Hall  _  Michas . Term
 the people : 
life Remainder to the said Samuel Bentham 
Law . 
 : ther means , a general Law against putting off bad money , backed by 
10
was not executed , or alters a document which has been executed by
16 Aug 1800
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five , between The Right 
have 
and by such authority , or alters the quantity or quantities of
 : mestic Coin . 
7 . Its currency must be universal :   _  not confined to this or that
that therefore the enumeration above given is exhaustive . 
will be put to two great charges , 1 . The Loss upon the wear and
The mischief of idleness is the tendency 
to all whom it might concern , that the subordinate 
3 .  _  Of exercising any function of Magistracy of which
 ( E )   [ Farther ]  
each year be on the one hand be made Creditors to the
though a considerable part  , is nothing nigh the 
if there be any part of the mischief without its punish= 
Peter the Great at Petersburgh ?  Or a second Pigal to replace
Theft
 " As it was impossible to explain to the natives , or cause
intending thereby to endanger the life or damage
preparations of an expensive nature , and begging to know 
II Collins
assemblage of them under his eye . 
 "  ( as those were stiled who had former formerly belonged to the 
A provision ought also to be made with regard to the ef=
approaches
No . 1  ( p . 74 )  July 1789 . The situation in which Expirees in
-triction , the paragraph in which it occurs stands next after a 
 : ner in which this matter is considered perfectly uniform 
20
-rous , in the same strain , but some of them  ( I understand ) 
who had none , flogged , on their attempting to go , as well 
Art . 15 . Each prisoner shall be allowed a share of 
quite sufficient for the purpose . Lord Pelham , on
in a certain degree of family relationship to such another person or per=
 " were found to compose a very considerable part of the settlement . "  
1 . Because the infamy will not be so intolerable in this
very intelligible to an enlightened follower of
of a Bank note .   <gap/>   particular circumstances it
9
THEFT .
free to engage in a new marriage ; the deserter remaining bound , 
 " given , viz . 
In this case an extraordinary value may be assigned as in 
By one individual in particular , an experimental proof of the
-tensity :  when its intensity is at a high degree , we may  ( preserving the same
or under sentence of transportation and appearing in manner 
Whereas in and by the Statute passed on the se-
8 .  _  Of putting one ' s self in the way of accidental opportu-=
 : munity or not by whom any such damage has been sus : 
it in that character , conceive that the consideration thus 
an institution of this sort at its outset , when per-
amongst different individuals , by which means it is much 
-pointment ; the other subsequent :  the person
in New South Wales could be established not being forth-
-tical offer thus made by him , is  _  that on the other 
shop where he is not know , or even where he is
 [ 13 ]  [ Me ... . issuing Clerk ]  For the purpose of responsibility
-cal one  [ consider ' d apart from the rest ]  tho effica-
footing as Domestic ?  
43
the decease of the survivor of the said Jeremy and
 : ed would be ordinarily the pleasure of male=
I believe this Expression will be deemed less
 " sudden impulse ; which renders it impossible to know when to
 : dom therefore venture to put off many such pieces together . 
Aggravations are
78
receiving six hundred lashes and wearing irons for six months .
the Philadelphia prison may be and have been 
account of all or any such articles expended either in qua- 
 : dicial power and subservience thereunto . 6 . Sovereign power 
 " for neither the burnt house , nor the slaughtered animals , which 
land
the reader with a motive for retaining the satyre and communicating
 " here became inexplicable . On a sudden , he chose to be in a rage 
Proposal had been given in , the expence of the
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
such survivor as well as for the value of the said Buil-
is upheld :  the district by which the road , the bridge , the aqueduct , the
 ( C ) 
by it  :  by which circumstance that source of testimony is en=
the said intended Establishment  , including the fitting up 
concerning a mandatory Law . 
 " of wheat belonging to a settler there , after having plundered him 
Officer of the Crown , but by leave of the Court on the part of 
were disaffirmed by the offender .
If it be without their consent , it assumes necessarily the 
in answer to the last communication from the Board . _  
word Defraudment , it is as yet but little if at all in use :  nobody
Of Matrimonial Disturbance .
13
meet with any Passage in a practical Book which intimates
of his punishment  :  and as it is strictly and indubitably 
gave way  ,
gentleman whose duty it had been  _  first under the
 " purchase it , and whose greater influence could get it
mode by steam )  has been lost :  one seventh of the
charge thereof during every moment of their res-
the repugnance , between the intentions , as declared in such 
C
sure of the Mind ; a pleasure of enjoyment , a pleasure of possession ,
produced . As if the party injured were at the time of
counterbalance the difference .... . ]   ]   ( d )  
 : ny one to assist him . Certain it is however , that prosecutions
it is absurd to apply the term of Law to motion 
 : dily pain in which you put a man to , the plainer it is that the
at the same Time of excluding Innocence , would 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
C
design , foundation , and government , of that
is even more likely to fall upon the people of his own country , 
the best professional advice seconded by the strictest
his duty to his master .
readers are to understand him ?  about as well as Dr . Brown ' s 
ever taken of it . Had the Hulk price been
accompanied by reproach :  and this produces at any rate
one written signature .
of man thus  _  thus compleatly  _  to expose himself  ?  
-turn to the price formerly established , viz . nine-pence per pound .
 [  ( c )  Commotions ]  Commotions may be manifested in the 
for this Offence ought to be regarded with a jealous eye ; and
21
59
which " 
 ( with an inscription declaring his offence )  
any
 " the governor ; it was , however , proved to him , that on occasion 
From what has been seen already of the nature of this 
grounded his recent Proposal for the lodging of
as follows  _ 
granted , by the Court before whom such conviction shall have 
tizan . It is a crime not of ambition nor of conscience , but of ra=
for her own child :  or from motives of vanity has wished to see
plain therefore that the Legislator before he can , with 
With this Idea  ( concerning what shall &
 " man , for every subsequent year I will maintain
 : vering it but demanding or receiving the stake
superiors , have found himself compelled to revoke it , and had
 " first year at no more than the expence of the
 " comprehensive venue , signifies a rule of action ; and is applied 
In a Law of this kind neither the delinquency nor the suffering 
when not do , restrictive .
that ensue : 
in peace and quietness that reformation which with a
The sex and number and age of the children is also to 
be for unlicensed artists to pursue them ; and the more 
the latter I mean all offences which any such multitude of persons 
43
bring
instead of  " wright , or wrong "  , had used the terms , 
the other by the person or persons so seized and possessed or intitled 
-tion . They constantly belong to it ; they are essential to it :  it cannot be con-
be satisfied with a thousand more . The two first
abovementioned in manner abovementioned  , Remainder to 
the most common is a flag , called a flag of truce . In 
30
C 
were thus attacked . 
and proportionably insufficient for the said intended pur- 
person or persons to be Governor or Governors of the said Peni-
for the office . In the instance of Mr Neild at 
provided that every offender so removed shall continue in the 
an Act to increase his recompense , the other to
C
 [  ( a )  Natural ones ]  By the Roman Law under Justinian it was made
Monster presented itself in undisguised deformity . I mean that face
Extract from Mr Ford ' s  " Observations upon 
 : fle , the event is by no means of itself a conclusive
C 
had begun his . I called Neild a second Howard :  
all
As to the mere Act of Coining considered by itself 
must be called .  " They depend entirely  ( says 
|| 4 Common . 232 .
the least , together with a Chaplain , Surgeon , Taskmaster 
For Examples in Proof of this , to avoid tedious
than in learning  _  the nature , use , and value of justice .  _  
latter metal to the Ingenuity of private Operators . 
17 5
so with regard to a third and any subsequent Offence .
facetious story teller was understood who had a Wind mill 
Criminals , improvement of the County Prisons ,
mere
to which I trusted had been every penny of it settled
Cases only of Theft as are punished with the Punishment
might put a mask on the generic character so that the repug-
made to pay - See in the Law of Parish Taxes . 
do it spontaneously and peaceably and endeavour not to 
=nities may take their rise . It seems hardly worth while 
being exerted directly on the Subject as by taking
of giving his assistance ; for instance , from malice , wantonness , 
contrivance 
for the face seen in this Country was never completely unmatted
Further consideration of it to a subsequent chapter
its being washed away .  +  
shall keep him to labour at such places and under such directi-
 " are yet farther encreased by the addition of so great a 
 ( without a possibility of making any thing saleable
42
is exactly parallel in it ' s Use and commensurate in 
in other respects is expressly reserved to the choice of the said 
let it point what way it will , I really have great
hand the leaving the reputation of an innocent man in
 : ner .
whether reformed or not , those who did return dropped in
sence of any of the parties who come afterwards to be injured 
But 
of ordinary sharping for the same reason that in that case 
 : perty of an individual . The impractibility of replacing the arti=
state thereof , at least in so far as the Public on behalf of 
 : haps some other pleasures that might be reckoned up , con : 
ground upon which any thing can be said in favour of a provi= 
out other Circumstances which being such 
-tain with accuracy the number to which they may amount :  
disposed
-tor , with out manifesting itself by some external sign,can never
=out being conscious of his having no trouble so to do for 
is comparatively small the pleasure of male=
Of Offences against Property
of the value of the whole . If a man must needs profit himself 
liable to be committed in prosecution of the gain , even here 
following ways ; 
as also in consideration of his being to be appointed Governor
2 . Also the greater number of instruments it may require to 
may 
to outweigh is the profit not upon the particular Act , but 
the persons in whose presence it is offered ; and the greater the 
7
that it was not fit to be punctually observed .
C 
and medicines , refer to
himself would here be as impotent , to save the men by whom 
And first as to the taking It may be
C
2 . Provisions of physical prevention ; or Provisions cal=
THEFT . 
Successors , which Feoffee after the decease of the Survivor of the 
from every one of a great Variety of Modifications &
 : ons are understood to concur in punishing are commonly 
 which has the power of making war and peace  , to pro : 
partly by the circumstances of the parties , partly by the nature
No
misfortune , the commissary was , at the close of this month , directed to re-
of the mode consisted in the not asking leave , at the risk of
exhibited and with like satisfaction as well as instruction to the 
at least of being raised to a level with that of treason . For as 
by continually changing the people with whom he deals , and 
they are made use of to define
true  . Mr Campbel ' s charge , as appears from the 
shall only be privately admonished .
into an unseasoned building :  dangers against which
that  " it was understood "   ( now for the first time , as already observed )  
fee be given him if he do but demand it .
since by the supposition he defends himself with all
so much as accrues from the using it for a Time . 
Thus far the worthy Magistrate . - A supposition , 
notion true or false of their being noxious to some article or other
pieces at once of bad Coin of the same appearance will 
Of Justification  ( See Tit .  [ Justifications ]  )  , if his forebearance pro : 
-ed by Government for nothing . Such is the hard-
C
coinage be periodically renewed . ( b )  +  2 . Let such Compositions be pre= 
 " be reimbursed to the County , on a fair statement of the 
comtemplating the subject in any such point of view 
prevail on You to be paid altogether in bad Coin . Sup= 
Quest . VI . 
the
with more propriety I called Howard a second Neild . 
punishment a punishment of which there remained but two
or her management during the continuance of the marriage .
Upon
or commercial capacity ; for instance by any such practices of a per=
-pective lives  , Now these presents witness and the 
thus-
any escape of such offender  , and also during such custody shall 
 " convicted , in which case he would certainly have suffered , the 
63
 " treasons or misprision thereof if committed within this realm "   [ 27.G.3.c.2 ]  
C
eye-witnesses it comes to be or is likely to be made 
invest those by whose means it is carried on , with par= 
shall be deemed to have embezzled it if he take not certain
 : sive or unwholesome occupations , See refer to 
C
Safe-conduct . 
committed , who they were that had been sufferers , it would not be an Of=
in their power , if they think it worth their while , to guard 
23 
and declared purpose of his conduct  ; when he acts in the 
 : parel and instruments of trade peculiar to each should re=
amount of the enhancement so proved  , together 
If a man pawns the goods of another as if they were his 
2 . Whether it were the intention of
penal to damage or destroy a sycamore tree  ( arbor  <gap/>   )  upon
be paid by the said Jeremy Bentham or his said Successors , on 
it is as much affected by the primary mischief of the in= 
be better calculated than the word  " prescribed :  "  It might upon oc-
altar of public justice . It was but t ' other day that a gentleman in 
right or no right made no sort of difference .
 : son at large , either by special authority from an Officer 
4 . _  And at that price  _ 
3 . If at the time he takes the thing he knows himself
The same measures which serve to provide only for 
every dominion , equally affects all persons and all property 
they demanded more than 500 per cent above what the same
together with its contents be to that amount .
Offences against Justice . 
punished criminally in behalf of the class at large :  where there is spe=
Such as a Statute of the Time of our Hen . 8  [ 25 
of the Court on the part of any other person whatsoever . 
patient , heard !   _  Alas , my Lord !  and is the offence inexpiable ! 
himself shall be as follows .
Governor for payment of necessary cloathing fur-
in full view of the effect of it , by those who to 
formation and improvement of harbours and by the erection of light-
Note .
may make it appear plainly that there was a fixed and
Irrational 
-master and such other Officers with their Subordi-
 [  ( B )  Behaviour ]  1 . Accordingly the deceit may be ope=
 " Middlesex .. . do .. . humbly entreat Your Grace to take into 
off a base Shilling may be Twenty four times as great  ( or 
Quest . 1 . Why criminal consciousness on the part of the second
eyes I should have said , had gentlemen chosen to
ignominious
the persons of others in order to guard against Danger 
-tors  ( if by a mere figure of speech a concentration 
is not done the extortion is not more to be imputed to the ra=
circulate more and more :  but the circulation even when this 
his Successors as a fund for a Superannuation
 : jects of the foreign state . This is the most common case , because 
but that such  ( as I have all along said  )  was the design on both
 : tance on such an occasion , unless when he has a special ground
that the number of Convicts received on board two ships only
Nature .
provided against with more or less attention in the laws relative to navi=
or if no such dominution shall have taken place  ,
occasion any trouble on the subject of the official 
nominally the same , become in effect so much the less 
 : ress
some little variations from the English Law and they may 
C 
by laying in supplies of water , providing machines for applying
these preparations , together with other occupations 
If in one of the two instances situation in life was 
system- no more than would have taken place had
be  <gap/>  in the punishment . denounced by it .
Frauds relative to the Coin .
15
order to cover a smaller quantity of his own bad Coin . 
receiver , but the donor- I had almost used another
of 
consideration of his being to be be appointed Governor of such 
all .
Ten
and kept in irons for six months . A very instructive example
C
artifices unheard of in diplomatic proceedings , even practiced without 
So instead of all other punishment he may be fined to
 to be defined :  it should be the same at one time as at ano-
Treasury letter , written 5 months and 8 days 
me to make pr preparations for , should be 
 ' is led to suspect , that the same rage for traffic , and & an intem-
=sion is made by the general clause for the 
-meal or other meal , or grain commonly used for
1 . Medical practice . 2 . Precaution against greater mischief . 3 . 
Magna Charta , the Petition of Right , the Habeas
every offender and offenders who shall be delivered into his 
present or future , one drawback from the goodness 
of persons assemble together in the Intention of engaging 
5 . Offences against Foreigners in contempt of the privileges 
-liament , expressly forbidden to be employed :  and , in so doing , 
The Memorial is printed at length in the  " Papers presented 
protection to him as to a native . In this point of view 
According to this false rule , such arrangements should 
Your adversary knowing this gets possession of
of the Courtier or of the Soldier or of the Lawyer :  but of the Ar=
-tionless official spectators , by whose connivance it
 : curity of it in this . Offences thus circumstanced require 
Of Simple Mercantile Defraudment 
performed by the discarded Ministers of the good Idomeneus ?  
the like circumstances . A servant is much more likely
himself of the imputation :  it is however most probable : 
progress of reformation is slow , we are not 
Art . 5 . And Whereas in and by the said Statute of the 7th 
that he was close to you ; insomuch that , had you but looked
 " shillings per bushel , and they were at the same time told to pre-
after fixing upon a certain piece of ground therein 
admit of their affording any such satisfactory proofs 
46
 : es on the person of a Jew , or damages the goods of another
considered is expedient , but inexpedient relatively 
 " than half that expence . "  This was the proposition
2
only Criterion , according to which any law 
its efficacy :  if no external evidence is required , but the know= 
destruction to
whom the thing was obtained ,  ( for instance by
degree to prejudice him against the injured person who is the 
fire
-ries be augmented again so as to amount to two hun-
of this it is only criminal devastation .
 <gap/>  him as we have seen , into all sorts of offences , it is very 
2 .
not of a value worth regarding . He may have taken it intending
4
B ' s Plow :  he is to take it away in six Days , and
two non-expirees . These four fugitives were discovered by smoking 
 : trod :  Ch :  Of Intention & Consciousness . 
instances as the Number of whi such as these
 : es with marks resembling those on the edge of any other Coin . 
from , whither he is absolutely sure that he could find or imagine 
=quo reliqui auferuntor .
a compleat suit of such cloaths as shall be allotted , and with 
as an article of Food or Cloathing ; or a written Paper or other In : 
goods is not quite so mischievous an offence as ordinary 
it seems to be
produce Unhappiness in the Community , but the 
clear of all taxes , fees , gratuities and other deductions 
2 . Any tool which is not of common use in any trade and 
ib .
may be in its design and consequences , yet not being the 
into his ear.- Cold Bath Fields Prison  ( Your Lordship
Offences against the Coin
as the said Commissioners shall deem necessary and expedi-
 " had had three men in her , who were each provided with a
   <gap/>   
in fact
say ?  I beg his pardon  _  not all the Counties toge-
failure , it is moreover agreed that in the event of any such 
in criminal  <gap/>  which See .
for instance the materials and workmanship 
evidence of fitness had manifested itself , would natu-
-remy Bentham or for any term or terms determinable up-
coming into office , finds him a Police Magistrate ,
upon the terms of his receiving the produce of 
bad
as the said Buildings shall be in readiness for the reception 
with power to dispose of it by will  _  she has exe-
remote from ordinary Language it might run
 " of his own labour ; and if any favour were shewn , to let
having for his recompence the not being starved .  _  
mother . The burthen of supporting them should be consi=
 ( 2 ) 
as the shadow of an excuse ?  
By the British Law a kind of Rush is forbidden to be cut
to the fund , by which the common property of the Neighbourhood
Art.6 . The said Jeremy Bentham and his Successors 
considerable that less than the two full lines here reserved could
to petty traders , who by shifting the scene might
ground in such manner and under and for such considera-
It was on this latter basis that Mr Bentham
well mounted and armed , I shew him which the 
 : ed , by the intervention of an Adulterer . It may indeed be perfect=
at the least
8,,10 1/2  ; and according to the reduced estimate afterwards made
Writer on jurisprudence paint the Creator , 
Coin :  and in this latter case the circulation of the base money is a 
had a right  _  those who had a right as well as those
-thor :  at the same time as to understand :  the subject be  [ never ]  the
this account seem harsh and unpopular to subject them at 
Administrators doth covenant promise and agree to and with 
5 . Those of a Guardian over his Ward  . See Law of Guardi : 
but the casks in which the salt meat was sent from England were in
Revd . Dr . Price . Such computation being made , the said
-ecutors & Administrators doth covenant promise and 
 ' until in until such Person shall have taken out his Ticket
that part of Jurisprudence to which this latter
divides
would 
in question .
afforded :   _  why ?   _  because the good effects of the 
1
Honourable Scholars , so well read in the red book of power , were 
where his master is dragging to prison must  <gap/>  a
though not every where without a murmur , because
hung up  _  the good Convict mentioned in No..3 .  " As his loss 
 but carrying it to A _  This we see would come
v . Campbell
Instructions to the Legislator .
much less than the punishment appointed for the same 
different manners and customs of the people .
 " but this Expence the Magistrates confidently hoped will 
trifle for a place of Inspector of Prisons ; to smell
of which every man is pretty well assured in the tribunal which is 
appear to be concerned ; for instance if it be 
The signs of a man ' s intending not to be amenable to law
See the Army and Laws  _  the Navy Laws and
 : ment shall be as follows 
are always those who compose the bulk of the people . And 
fewer than one stripe nore more than five for every days
As the Result of our Inquiries brings 
him .
piece of Silver coin :  as a piece of Silver Coin is with more 
away , to cause his cattle to feed off the grass from a certain spot , or 
 : ticular distinctions . Such persons are known by diffe= 
hostility to other states have a tendency to bring on a reta=
attack of a beast , and there is nothing else at hand that will 
vants - The Law of Apprentices  _  Law of Journeymen  _  Law 
 " they had taken away the sails of the boats , the men ' s blankets ,
 : gainst any capital Loss that might otherwise befal 
 : stance for the benefit of sea-bathing or drinking wa=
all roses , can not be said of that .
is a criminal who has the inclination and the power to do 
so much easier to counterfeit than handwriting , the 
is what very often happens 
With 
to any one so much gold or silver .
7 . The Paper , by its size , shape , texture , are thinness , par-
11
the debility resulting from the opposite excess  ( by 
nothing like illustration from a hand like mine .
the chance of convicting a man of it upon direct proof is compa=
 " Communities :  in the construction also of 
utmost efficacy of such local & partial improvements .
the custody , maintenance and employment of the said origi-
C
means of some thing or person else 
 " Individuals do not , from a sense of the terrible consequences to the
his discharge , there shall be paid by the said Jeremy 
of Lucre . Taking an Utensil belonging to 
be known ; and the assigned cause for which he receives this pen=
Prisoners according to the plan prescribed by the Statute 
Endless would be the Enumeration of such 
3 .
A still severer fate awaits them :  Yes , my Lord and 
 : tion one is at war with may be impaired yet the strength of 
contemplation :  of which kind is a capitulation :  or 2 . par=
the said Jeremy Bentham and his Repre-
the injury incapable of making resistance insomuch that
sake of distinguishing this Offence from Burglary : 
Before any instructitions were received for stopping 
sufficient Deputy present to the Court of King ' s Bench a 
that difficulty in proportion as the punishment is 
be in a much worse situation . For when You
in manner abovementioned , Remainder to any Assignee 
-ed for that purpose by the King ' s Majesty his Heirs or 
more money for his service than it is worth , or makes more 
3 
on 
estimate at least which never looks for any thing
 " and a considerable addition was made to that belonging to the crown by the purchase of
species of criminal destruction  :  an Offence , of which as well the pro=
Of Adultery .
the Security of one ' s own nation promoted by these minute in= 
 : maging of such works :  also by various provisions in the Laws of
of the place :  such as the quantity of building
military service of the enemies or revolted subjects of a 
F.9 . 14 Dec
reducible to the following heads :  viz 
4
by a superior , Law therefo inferior
 : most any other country is that disposition to mercy of the prevalence 
2
Article p . 
It matters not whether the thing be set
of the proximity of the divisions of space which they happen res=
what is which is to be so punished ?  What is
ones . * In Pensylvanyia too & in New York , the whole 
Meanwhile I have entered into this Discussion
Exposition
he be spoken of by me . In matters of this kind -
sense of word in a definition , what one expects is that he should 
 : nishment :  and if both were to undergo the same corporal 
Noble and Right Honourable and Honourable Conspira-
no
as also for the lodging
to a state of society , that is , to a State , where 
 : tive to the above pleasure of malevolence ,
Majesty is enabled to give to such Overseer as abovementioned 
in the accounts kept of the disposal of these valuable instruments 
expediency is , that is aimed at , or even compassed , at the
First Class for example would stand thus :  Tit . I . Of Sim=
injurious to the principle .
In many cases it appears smaller in that case the offence 
supplied to each at least once in every month . 
 " Lieutenant Governor "  , he was punished with six hundred lashes ,
and so in proportion for any term less than a year 
telling the shopman or otherwise giving him no : 
-ing convicts in general , or such of them as would other-
avoid being trampled upon by a horse  . So if a housemaid
nition will amount to this , that  " municipal 
received all the Compensation which the Law
to have undergone a considerable enhancement ; in conse- 
to
of Mr B . & his Successor , Government are to 
of Mortality , and the calculations therein grounded by the late
a Demand  _  she dies  _  after that on some
agreement :  as a piece of paper containing a promise to deliver
a new one , appears from a Memorial presented by the 
of time . In the next place he must , upon an average , expend 
 : pose of extorting her consent . 
any degree of Justice , punish idleness , or before he can 
steps to find the owner out . What these steps are see in
 : thers ]  in raising commotions among the people with intenti=
to that of conciseness . Let an account be taken of the several 
2 .
||| or affectus furandi Just . Instit :   _  Till . de obl : 
maintenance of the said Establishment , shall during the same
 +  The Word Aphorism being an unfamiliar Word Term ,
confining and employing Convicts it is provided among other 
-tion of the sum of twenty seven thousand pound to be paid in 
appointed by the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury or their 
zeal or  <gap/>  be opposed here after a preliminary to
The value of a new service occur ing in an old office is to be
of servant which has any Article of Law peculiar to it . 
that day twelvemonth , clear of all deductions , with interest in 
upon Government would have appeared to him in a 
an extended application of the principle of the 
it is less than in the case of Theft . The apprehension a 
 [ The terms employ ' d in a Definition should ]  have a meaning
at such times and such a number at a time as he shall appoint . 
Yourself :  and such an injury if offered with impunity , 
of those Gaols should render it absolutely necessary :  for it
first place into such as are first rate crimes and such as are only offenc=
which it has to give birth to all the crimes of indi :  
C
keeps it uncorrected .  _ 
p . 208 . A great deal has been said , and many authorities
break out
 : mission and that , whether he meant to deny it to all persons
more if he takes measures to prevent its being
which is annext to that one of the old services which comes nearest
11
sports to be used .
37
have taken it intending to make use of it merely 
 : tify if prosecuted for defamation . 3 . Neither the supposed
upon a family when an impostor has introduced himself in=
Reasons
-ploying one thousand Male Convicts at the least , together with
 " a threatening manner . He again levelled his piece at them , and
he 
much at least as is printed in Italics , is what is intended , I suppose 
 " being allowed that all savages are under the dominion of a
Buildings shall be in readiness for the reception 
that may accasion differences in point of mischief between 
that fortune ' s having been dissipated by the Offender , that she
erected )  that he  " understands the object of it "  and 
Guardian or Ward , Master or Servant , or an old intimate friend .
gentleman , instead of preventing the abuse , re nurses
the ship , an operation , for which the consent of the master  ( for
shall 
of dispensing power . The mask was now thrown off and the
as those whose duty it was to prevent it .
from whom the thing was obtained . See Theft
A servant has been trained up in the habit of subm=
case of recapture . 
the circumstances under which Mr Ford  ( surely for
 ( a ) 
to be to the number of persons living at the commencement 
already given :  For years together , neither the one nor the other , 
absolute stipulation outstanding against one in
materially distinct from Inundation , is almost every where pro=
to excuse him from the same length of confinement 
The french rulers , have , throughout , evidently acted upon the principle ,
8
agree to and with the said Lords Commissioners 
 : mong the marks made use of to testify such designs 
& Measures
that of Louis the 15th at Paris ? 
 " safety "  .
 + 
 " riel a ses loix , les intelligences superieures
and possessed as aforesaid :  the value of such buildings improve-
office and in eloquence ?   _  got up as near as may be as it was 
places and under such directions as his Majesty shall by order 
-knowlegdge , proof that would be termed legal fails 
given the only clue , which can explain to 
53
such Persons from the country Gaols , unless the crowded state 
 " time three native boys living with one Pavel , a settler , and two
In this dramatic age might not the recrimination scene 
 " objects of their revenge ...... .
man ' s being in the habit of Coining may in general be looked 
and 
If any one commit Theft his punishment shall be 
Letter 3d
assaulting the gentleman in return if he can save himself by
Government have had to pay , if it had gone to work
and the best are together there at sometimes though not at all times .
on this subject and enable him to determine when a man is guilty . As
 " price of grain could not be continued longer than that season ; 
of men
-chief which he has done to the party injured .
expression )  that it is intenser when at a low degree we call it faint  .
to be no end of all this malice  _  of all these impu-
Expedients certainly have occurred to me , by which a
idea of the ingenuity displayed by the composer ; these and per : 
Art . 3 . And Whereas the Proposal of the said Jeremy 
he would be the criminal Taken i : e :  the Thief
57
he has property , this is called Prodigality :  or by omit :  
 " boat which he had brought with him , & the whale boats , they
placed under
From the mere circumstance of a man ' s having 
preparations for an establishment of double the magnitude , 
C
C
a
It is in pursuance of this plan , my Lord , that a 
 : bably might be no more than the ordinary 
though not mentioned were deemed  " disrespectful to the
for
Lastly 1 . The danger of detection is much upon a Par . There 
no indignation ; their low and scandalous frauds no contempt ; their treacheries 
country , and the nature of the soil . affect
two
that his time of punishment was expired , claimed his liberty .
said year , according to the London Bills of Mortality , and 
5 .  _  Of putting one ' s self in the way of chance opportunities
-tions must vary in different crimes . 
be as nothing - there is no Gospel - propagating Lord-
-missioners of his Majesty ' s Treasury on the part & 
 : tended
him to abstain from doing so . 
in Mr Pitt ' s speech of the 3 Feby 1800 , in which among other particulars , 
man ' s Law . Sect concerning accidents by Fire . 5 . The Miner ' s 
the standard the total of deaths at the end of a
Such is the energy with which at the price of
to restrain him . If then it would take him ever so little 
compensated in any ascertainable degree by the 
natural life of him the said Jeremy Bentham 
Personal Injuries .
 " he prescribes to himself . "   _  This may be 
Note .
9 . Schoolmasters in sufficient number shall be provided , by 
Theft
36
 : culated to enhance by physical means the difficulty of imi=
is
acted as to consummate to this Purpose their respective
presumption in regard to will  _  the clearest proof 
the persons in question to admit them or deny them 
a man , by false suggestions or deceitful behavi : 
 " from the prize to be landed , for the immediate accommodation of
of such devisee or devisees then by the Executor or Exe-
fittest manner in which he can be made to suffer 
the price of Glass by an Act of the 1794 Ch.37 And 
-tham for and during the natural life of the said Je-
with an allowance annexed to the said office of not less than 
 : lar persons to betake themselves upon the first alarm to the place
such a very loose one and on that account very liable to be abused . It 
the place , such as the quantity of building
13
Family Imposture is where a person in the intent of 
 " them as much trouble as possible , he would direct two gentle-
year in one case , and for two years in another , 
any act or practice which shews that the owner
few
1 . A spot for the erection of the building to be provided at the 
1
or agree with any person or persons for the erecting 
thus much is our doubt , that by this order the assurance
standard the annual proportion of the deaths at the end of
-ral life with the same powers as those which his 
as in the words acuteness , and acumen :  in the
envelopped
Distiller ' s Law :  Sect . Concerning accidents by Fire 7 . The
 ' carrying off from thence any other Person or Persons whatsoever , 
 : bited only in the way of example , to give a general idea )  
and allowances as are herein after mentioned , with such
day of the delivery of such account to the day on 
in theft ; and what perhaps is more to the purpose the 
 (   ) 
 : tains such or such a quantity or quantities of such or such 
- " ple have been sufficiently understood , proofs would not have
the Home Department , to appoint one or more fit and discreet 
sometimes with one , sometimes with another , of the sources ensuing ;
Letter therein spoken of as received from his Grace , write 
description of persons but extending to all descriptions .  _ 
applying it is not so much the effect it may be expected to
upon it ?  Procedure , thus summary !  score the secretum Judicis !  
3
State possesses a Jurisdiction over a person that it can possi= 
cannot be said of that . A plant that is given for a Rose is not a 
incurable
-ing themselves with , were it only that in that behalf
equal the expence . It is in this way that the 
a circumstance , of which , from the first to the last , he Mr
it is provided , if it be only for want of being able 
a part of it proportionable to the amount of what 
 : lator as by the Judge . 
Bentham Esq : r for building a Penitentiary House
small
least  _  not to speak of other bars  _  circumstantial 
or State rioting
 " party , refuse to prosecute ; nor juries , from motives of compassion ,
to Mr Neild ?  The negative is but too nor notorious . 
 " with the reduction in the price of grain which had been ordered ,
less Value , that produces all the Mischief . 
Want of regular market for sale of produce 
of coercion . But is it the result of choice ?  This 
be true , that with the appearance of meaning something , it was
appropriated to that title .
in point of fact suffer as much by being deprived of part 
Lords Commissioners and their Successors as follows . A
dicr decrease of crimes than the real plan of the
 " or upon mutual compacts , treaties , leagues , 
-ploy the Prisoners for the proper benefit of them the said 
As to other Convicts , it will depend on the opinion of 
9
multiplied these operations are , the more difficult it will 
P .
than that of the term Law :  and the entire expression a rule
4 . He may be made to wear the Adulterer ' s Coat for 
are
the fault not of the subject but of the Legislator . When 
-oners and their Successors as follows . A compu-
case it is called real evidence or information ; or 3ly By
-rities , to set their hands to labour . 
Animals that may be considered as noxious to man may
Justification II .
only to be applied to the inferior class of traders  <gap/>  
whole system of procedure )  is such as cannot be 
4 . He may be banished the presence of the party injured 
THEFT .
have any great objection :  but in England
be taken without enquiry is natural enough , customary
not half compleated for such a number , has already 
other 
It
should be given in words at length in the form of the entry made
method is taken to extend it , has still its bounds . In the 
still further Degree of Minuteness by tracing
upon this uncertain ground I can find no other than the following :  
 : culation which is altogether upon a par with Coin ; a phe=
farther agreed that in pursuance of the said Act 
For proof I betake myself once more to the
Of Theft or Stealing .
before the process of Coining can be accomplished . 
employing in hard labour such Convicts as are therein also 
the tendency of which is to bring on this calamity , wherever any injury
Note
2 . She may be banished the presence of the married
among all men , the same motives , 
Will it be seriously apprehended that under the 
same Idea in Substance , only as if it were under a
 ( a ) 
clause added to that title of this Law which includes 
 : dination of her condition and the modesty of her Sex .
issued by the Governor Esq . 
 " that such Penitentiary Houses should be used .  .  .  . 
which a common Man would deem a taking has
in New South Wales : 
several Directions , Provisions , Penalties and Forfeitures in and 
C
much more an affront from a gentleman :  A blow from a
would be abusing it , if he made use of it for a receptacle for such 
the opinion of Parliament would do all this  _  would restrain 
or a punishment .
and reflection , has two main grounds , which distinguish
Iron bar , or by wounding him with a sword or knife , that You
A  " criminal court "  ?  What criminal court ?  the court legalized by
it where it may be wanted , and making it the business of particu=
stick or piece of paper above-mentioned  . 
one . The exertrions of Howard have long since received 
ny of our Author ' s Windmills will prove geese . 
more Coin that it will be expected should be disbursed by a 
lawful Claim be made to them , shall be forfeited .
A State-Tumult is where out of dissatisfaction
remainders 
Space for prevention of disease is a most indis-
immoveable . Accordingly to dig Stone out of a quarry and carry it 
terror
part of the management of the said intended Penitentiary House , 
of Exchequer Bills , in respect of size .  _  
uncorrupted sense of justice , the Governor had set out with this
to commit it . 
4 . If having been detected in Adultery or using sollicitations or 
from the Reports made to the King ' s Bench from
as if the man disabled or mutilated were one to whom
It 
of the Law . 8 . Innocence of Intention . 9 . Intoxication . 10 . Com=
Of Simple Merchantile Defraudment 
2 . Famine and other kinds of Scarcity .
No . 2  ( p . 130 )  August 1790 . Another freeman trying to quit the
introduced . Should the Inventor of this species of 
be taken for making it universally known by proclamations and o=
little apprehension from in regard to this , supposing 
to law for taking a thing when he intends either to keep the affair
C
4 ) 
pronounce Judgement ; and the Court may if they think proper
THEFT
of a disposition at least , not to grudge exertions 
 " several Particulars "  . - 
when behind his back ; particularly in proportion as it is
that time .
 : tices as are supposed directly or indirectly to contribute to the da=
period as of the fair or current price of the like ar-
even be entitled to lament it as a misforturne , ought so to 
or of instruction
In such case the offender shall be put 
tion .
misfortune to come to the business already determined to find  _  
each year out of the said number of a thousand prisoners
adorn the annals of 1802 . This Honourable Colleague 
his Majesty ' s Ministers in the Police department in
Of State-Tumults .
 ( without a provision of this sort )  can render You ,
Such is the crime a sample at least of the crimes  _  
are Crimes that are apt constantly to come in competition ; crimes 
his conduct . 
This is what our Author says , of the word Law :  and this or so  _  
turn Robber . 
Of Incendiarism .
I must apologize for my inattention in neglecting to acknowledge
an offence against one ' s own state , as such it ought to be 
came out by this same vessel several free and honest families .
afford some light :  the one antecedent to the ap-
of a variance in Opinion . Such Arbitrators 
-deration of his being to be appointed Governor of 
place
present Majesty ' s reign  , intituted An Act for the effectual Trans-
inconvenience that immediately occurs ; but there is scarce 
it touched before||
our own state to the enmity of any other . In point of prac= 
2 . Si tempore primo sententio lato testiculus sit ei tantum
Also , according as from the sex , age , profession , or 
distinguish two periods :  the one preceding the point of time at
23
Thise point here to be decided involves no collateral
 ' squandering the whole produce of their hard labour in trifles , 
Expirees was for the first time brought upon the carpet being
-nishment , the choice of which is therein committed to the 
which the amount thereof shall have been 
such a cause will produce such an 
so on : 
called fpr them is over :  if they are , let those Rules
 : mon humanity and civility would give to any one
curious as it is obscure :   _  Papers sent from the Secretary of State ' s 
Cause of Lucre or , without a motive .
is in several points the only ground I can exhi-
Excuses 
C
4 . But if any one bring up a child begotten of a married Woman
-tion of his term , it is moreover agreed that , on the dis-
the first year was included in the said estimate of 
There are those who seem half inclined not to admit of
predecessor of the  " great person "  he is so afraid of 
 : ticular acts have any particular tendency to promote
2
Now in
it . This what every body may  call Theft . If instead of
have been all consumed , and the colony left without animal food ,
nor any plan at all :  at length  _  when every thing that 
The reason is not difficult to percieve . The general character of 
64
under him to depart from any such measure  , or dis= 
disposition might be overruled by other circumstances . 
Lewis ' s or Catharines . 
 " to kill them if they did not instantly inform him , & presented
that the only eligible mode of managing an establishment 
nt
=lationship to the prejudice of some other person , and knowing such
C
comparative
4 . That  _  
the said Lords Commissioners as also the said Lords Com-
A Thief or a Sharper who has followed his occupation for a length
circumstanced , is evident enough ; the tendency of such
the hardship to Government . Suppose the Annuity
founder ' s Law . 8 . The Chymists Law &c . &c . 
this day the said piece of Ground has been fixed upon accor-
nations that the protection which every state affords to its own 
the State in their private capacity  ; or 2.ly The State itself 
7 . On abridgement of the Liberty of carrying on busi=
 " total inability to bear any reduction in the price of the wheat of this season , 
separated from every Thing which it touched before 
Of the above offences , such as all or most nati=
Assistance . 
they are in  " improved "  colonies  _  it is by such 
to  " indemnify more Trespassers & other petty
foundation of Law , for Law itself , then
any Assignee or Assignees jointly or successively of the said 
 : perty of assignable individuals as that of a Neighbourhood may
If a menial servant or day labourer behave in an 
such Feoffee so appointed , such seizin and possession as aforesaid
as for instance , from the laws of trade , or from the
15
13
Of Things found
 : pence , as the danger and apprehension of taking bad guineas 
To secure to each Prisoner being able to work an 
Statutes
 : tended to any considerable quantity  , will give him a con=
7 .
 : certain it by the letter of any universal Law . It will depend 
nothing more than bare suspicion . There is however very fre=
 ( for it would be too hard upon him to require him to produce , any 
Aggravations
in the said Act and herein after particularly 
Punishment 
takes it  ( a Servant suppose )  cannot read and knows not the 
requisite in order for a person in whose possession or custody the
are ingredients in the lawful Coin provided such washing be 
their associates too , in many a lofty station , unless Parliament in 
who should ask him and be at the trouble of taking 
that if one such Felon shall so have been convicted of divers
buildings and other accommodations for the reception of every 
all cases . It may therefore as well be made by the Legis=
which hitherto they have been so much more engaged in teaching 
 extension
know him . O cry I , that ' s easily done , it ' s 
examining and the more likely he is to secure himself . 
 " recreation such as dauncing either men or women ,
wishing well to the foreign one :  that is , upon what it may
commonly to make such a profit at 1 a place where he is 
3 . Mischief by Infants , Idiots and Maniacs .
have to hope from the foreign :  partly upon what it may
prohibit any metallic composition in order to guard against its being 
exemplified  _ 
of the loss 
hundred was fit for that purpose a second time . Could any timber , fit
1
 " unable to suggest any remedy , he therefore desure desired that 
I also carried on the Disquisition to a
case that is material ; whether , in default of an inducement 
This general modification , by which the condition of
of the Tradesman who sells the produce of the labour of a mul=
-dingly and the said Jeremy Bentham appointed sole Feoffee 
thus contriving always to have strangers to deal with , he may 
payment of
damage
from without excepted . 
 : ferring it to any one else .
of the Husband or Wife of the person in question . 
and with a clean shirt at least twice in every week .
as aforesaid shall remain and continue in such legal representatives 
is the stronger the greater the danger appears to be which
 " year for maintaining Prisoners on the Hulk Plan _  
be taken into the account . The males should be   <gap/>   the
But if the offender does really return the goods provi=
course to inform the owners .  <gap/>  to  <gap/>  if  <gap/>  <gap/> 
 .  .  . Let us determine what reliance we can place on his engagements
with which Lord Pelham has forced a fifth hundred
of all and every Offender and Offenders who shall be 
to constitute the ground of the just-quoted 
They had been inveigled hither by conditions held out by govern-
France whether owing to the severity of the punishment , or 
If the rules he means , are rules that do not err themselves , what it 
even
be distinguished into such as are noxious to his property alone ; and
 " district determined to revenge their death . There were at this
which you suppose is mad ,
No 10 
Samuel Bentham under the powers of the said
or wherefore :  and for decency ' s sake , and because
 ( A )   ( B ) 
keeping or carrying any clippings or filings of any current money
Note .
may give him moderate chastisement on the spot
without excepted .
that method of living which is resorted to for the sake of guarding one ' s
foreign government gives you a pension , it certainly is not with=
3
any other day or days on summons from the Court or in 
C
To be omitted
a stranger passing by a Shop snatches up a thing and runs
Between Coining and Robbery the case is different . A
standing or of late standing :  or in the latter case whether 
 : ssitious Child . Excuses
A well behaved man ?  then what becomes of the economy of
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
the service done by the suppression of the offence . the worse State 
other
=ed at Nurse . The Nurse has thought herself unable to provide
Excuses
C
another on a military account are 
-lation :  and that as well at all times from and after the
as the information extends )  to have been received :  the other sub-
a degree these obstacles have been overcome . 
of bye standers . For whether the person whose property the things 
of 
represent , as of the Officers themselves is apt to be suf= 
their respective lives Now these presents witness and the 
Nobody has entered more fully into their views , or pursued them logically
Governor ' s
respectively above limited . 
institutes a different offence :  to wit , an irreparable personal
Whether in such a Case a Jury will depart or
Five Men were in Discourse , one of whom being 
against his will .
she had none :  the only bait that tempted the Offender was her
Coin of his own coining . What he can circulate of this bad 
after 
-tody , maintenance & employment of the said original num-
his anxieties to steer clear of the rock of offence ,
thereof shall not in the whole exceed the several utmost sums 
united with power , that none of the acts committed at any time by the
Devisees of such survivor as aforesaid and in default 
-mencement and amount thereof to be deter-
perspicuity , what is the question upon the first point , 
keeping and carriage of Gunpowder . 
in which it is . In the first case if it be done in the way 
Maniac ' s Law 
not this advantage , at the time :  perhaps he may never
 : monial Disturbance ]  sub eadem voce
If it were there are few persons in the nation who might not 
2 
the words Genus and species , and know what they are saying , put up 
-able differences in the various laws , and 
is still analogous . In both cases the immaterial
 ' he is sorry to observe , that , instead of those attentions being felt 
Of Frauds relative to the Coin . 
To me , who neither am known nor know , he is known
 _  together with Mr Bentham ' s answer . 
Order if possible to establish that Distinctness of 
Other Excuses are , 2 . Want of Intention . 3 . Ignorance
involves
A servant ought to behave with the same humility 
that 
ample Subject is susceptible .  Yet of those whose other Offences
or as if an artist cut off the hand or put out the eyes of a
abide by it :  that it should be always his sense at least whosoever 
Note 
 : ery or repentance of persons privy to the imposture . The
It seems rather to concern the function of the Judge and to belong therefore
 " the Governor ' s permission :  and as it was not probable that many 
fraud . They might even be made to share the disgrace of 
common Sense & not of Law to say , if this was a
directed , delivered  _  not to the person in New South Wales to
had no right to legislate without 
 : confined space ; such as riding on horseback or in a car=
 : essed of a very small degree of responsibility :  but a consi :  
we say of a Legislator who from the same premises takes upon him 
the
other purposes therein mentioned , or under such other direct-
1 . 
a great degree in the vouluntarily assistance of the people
only evidence by which the Governor ' s right to confine any body
 " all those necessaries of life which they required for paying their labourers , the 
be of a value to be not worth regarding :  if it be such
motive to the commissions of the offence as much any other 
-spection House in and by means of which said Building 
In the view of correcting this real inequality , what :  
 " completely monopolized ,  that the settlers had but few opportunities 
too apt to suppose the same of others , who have
 ( A ) 
1st . The word  " felonious "  is afterwards explained 
complete
in the case of domestic theft is their being subject to a
Vacation time from any Judge thereof , full , true , and perfect 
35
for confining and employing in hard labour , person convicted
unavoidable one  _  is the smallness of the scale .
discourse .
he would look up to You with an eye of humi=
Of Theft or Stealing .
 [  ( A )  Advantage ]  It matters not of whom the Advantage is tak=
 : ticular , extending only to one or a few persons who are 
or writing . This being the case , the work he has cut out for 
of the same as to deprive the legal representatives of the said 
a pleasure of the irascible ; what we shall have to say of any pleasure
much gold or silver . 
 : tention of expressing contempt from him or exposing him to
Calendar months after this date  :  and the remaining 
In such case the offender shall be 
Idleness . Subsistence therefore he will certainly pro :  
have to leave his Representatives with a burthen 
3
Defamation , it is true , is rather more likely to pro=
=dulterer ' s Coat , for a certain time in a manner more or less
imitation 
47
The disposal of the fortunes of the married persons upon
-jected . 
must possess two qualities :  it must possess intensity ; it must possess Dura
and Costs shall be adjusted between him and the Hus=
a head for a proportionable premium to be paid by the said
said
instruction , is a school the less a school because 
under the above recited Act
it he denies it :  and this Nor does it matter whether
 " I verily believe , to expend from the public purse 
My Lord the difficulty cannot stand more fully 
promise to stop nobody I mean of those who had any 
Improvements and Personal Estate , Now therefore it is hereby
mitior "  .  " dimitior "  is  " to measure "  .
-ity afforded by this flight of mine was  _  if not the only cause  _  
 " to fill his boat & effect his   <gap/>   retreat unmolested .
2 . 
 " instructions in force , which , in placing these people under the
C
61
THEFT
acts as he could not discover to be productive of any particular 
Taking  ( as to the Manner )  may be
admit of a man ' s doing mischief with impunity .
Extenuation Excuse IV .
Order of St George of Russia and Brigadier General in her 
of such or such a person from enjoying the advantages of their
28*
it derives its value only from agreement  :  as a piece of 
 " buy the Land , I will find Buildings , &c . and for every 
a man standing already in full light  _  would derive
Sect . I . Law in General
-ries be augmented again so as to amount to more than two 
individually in contemplation ; of which kind is a Safe-
exempt an inhabitant from that particular dominion ; 
without
and 
lovers of practical as well as poetic justice ?   _  
thus :   " The Action of the Taker being exerted
to Coining , although he should cease to coin , may continue 
Principles standing thus , now as to facts . Of 
Persons bound to give information whether parties or
labour at such places and under such directions 
Martial Law .
 : terests those of all other Classes in the state put toge=
Letter 3d
would be affected by the loss , the more trouble he is at in 
person of that persuasion
cost several thousand pounds . So far therefore from 
annum for every such day , if any , during which the same 
which the same policy had provided for me , the 
confinement . The stripes to be inflicted at such times and
Screw , out of any metals or compositions resembling those of 
of male  , and the party threatened be a female .
those artificial barriers or such natural  ( a )  ones as the course of the
explained specifically , & this may be done 
- " mate .. . laid before the Court :  the business was postponed
 " witnesses to prove that a number of white people had at
3
I . Conduct of the Governor towards Expirees , principally in relation
 : ther his   <gap/>   to deny it to all persons in general ,
-charge of every such Prisoner  , or at any subsequent 
and upon what hinge it turns . I will state the propositions 
12 .
case of a privileged person the state of which he is a member 
 : nishment subjoin therefore a list of such species of Forgery 
shall exert himself with ordinary diligence in the
my Lord , to his relief , for nothing less than a great
 : nicious to the community , by the dread of its displeasure .
old cloaths to serve for working )  All this , besides 
flattering  _  not to speak of successors .  _  To the 
Colony , the condition of those who had a right , and those
-pleasure  _  as well rewards the persons by whose im-
whom such conviction shall have taken place . Provided 
of another .
acceptors as advanced upon the faith of it , and Acts 
5 . It matters not whether it be valuable to an Individual , 
to the Goal from which he shall have been removed ;  "  And 
the precepts of the revealed law :  whereas 
thus characterized )  from that time to the 18th of March 
Prisoners is interested therein  :  and moreover that they shall 
suspect , without being able to affirm it to a certainty , that the worst
C
he means to keep it , as an additional mo=
-culiar nature invented by Samuel Bentham Knight of the 
Penitentiary Establishment the more constantly and effectually 
to be erected and adapted to the said purpose a Penitentiary
there at present , deducting also the average value 
heads !  What will it now say of the single head , that orga-
to be deemed cruelty , See the Laws concerning Man and Wife . 
moreover that they shall also by such deputy or if thereto ordered 
Assignees jointly or successively of the said Jeremy Bentham 
2 .
to me :  and that after his proposal had been 
 : ed body of Law some explanations would need to be given under each . But they do not appear of
confidence . In his title page , as well as in his survey
 : ment Security . In this case ; considered as a Government
the New Prison is comprized :  I mean the so called
-ployed for human food :  which said allowance of
be administered . 
Incendiarism is where  [ without law-
together with its contents be to that a : 
to both parties for their costs of suit ; and to the apellant for
of the last necessity . _ 
causing it to be taken for a portion of matter so stamped 
 " about this time signified about this time that the respective terms for 
self preservation for an excuse . The Englishman , who I suppose 
it be to the poor but industrious settler who might be 
and maintaing of
to wit
recommended for the office , & his conduct when 
he does circulate , certainly it is not the whole that can be bad 
opportunity of being acquainted with the history of 
Aphorism 3d 
 : er to express the Agent :  and the expression Frau=
enable him to give . 
are in plenty . Bad shillings , it is true , are also taken knowingly :  
Idleness then , when the result of choice and ac :  
 " That a Man cannot grant any Thing to his Wife , or
fits a man for practising this ingenious though dishonest spe=
 (   ) 
or Successors , under such powers , directions , limitations and 
C
worthy Magistrate :  in whose testimony , as far as it goes ,
found to come under this Case . 
found it he shall be be deemed to have embezzled it . What
this that I thought it would be most  <gap/>  conspicuous
it is I say but embezzlement for as to the taking ,
drawn on either side till now . Mr Bentham ' s pro-
1 . If before the Offence the Woman prostituted herself for 
Consent ; provided it be of all parties who
|| In other words , It must have been completely 
 ( C ) 
pretension , to all appearance at least , surely was
the
Injuries .  Tit . VI . Of attempts to commit Irreparable Perso=
18 .
 : fering by bad money . The case is that people in gene=
call in any number of persons who might chance to 
according to the number of the persons 
 " near four years since he had given them notice , that the high 
explained , I proceed to collect the manifestations that occurr
of the said year as 1 to 25 , this for the said intended number
not in the settled course of Law :  there needs a Law on purpose . 
by courts of justices , not by a legislative authority , until
to be much more than sufficient to answer such
Such I conceive to be a Statute of Queen Elizabeth , 
the precaution to wear his Money , this precaution , when ex=
in the Town . See Tit :  Justifications .
2 . A lease thereof for 99 years to be granted to the proposer 
It matters not whether it be a measure of long 
threatens him and the less trouble it would cost to save
 : specting the actual past and present matter of fact . 2 . If
have occasioned a man by striking him ; and it appears that
11th . To pay a sum of money for every one who dies 
4
 _  The one more popular in it ' s Use and ample in 
 " of his wounds . The natives belonged to the tribe of which
1 . If he omits to take such measures as he has
what is uncommon , is to find this falsification take place in 
Notwithstanding this , there is , it must be confessed , in the
this class is by reason of the number of those who are com=
to death by being made to undergo the water 
their quietus from above :  Neilds seem but to in-
be sent to Bedlam , and with it my poor project , with the stamp
Irrational as by driving off by Shouts a Horse
up or disguises himself for the purpose .
 ( c )   + 
Deputy present to the Court of King ' s Bench a Report , exhibiting 
 : disposition . But such facts are commonly notorious at the time ;
This much for those Acts , which tho ' 
or to acquire .
far ?   _  the truth , my Lord ?   _  the real , the legal  , the impending 
the French Assignats . Differs from all the other above 
that oughr ought to be disclosed , steps in & covers 
as is seldom committed but by persons too poor to be in 
-ence of the right had not seven months before , been noticed
 discourse or speech , in which case it is called oral evidence
house standing by itself :  if the value of it
11 . A portion of such share  ( but unless with the Prisoner ' s 
of the Law . 4 . Innocence of Intention . 5 . Intoxication .
 of Linnaeus  .
on the North West Coasts of England or in any part of Scotland . See Stat .
tice ; and if it be , the mischief of execution may be greater than 
fond of shewing his Learning , happened to use 
-spected during every moment of their lives , and 
particular part of a particular state can be beaten or imprisoned or robbed at
-parted to our author ,  " Nemo unquam 
C
amendment &c , but to leave the matter 
With Regard to this Definition , the Source of
-happiness in the Community , and less than 
=gainst a class of persons at large . By the former I mean all such
 " upon the ground , probably mortally wounded . The whole body
divided subject , is a Writer well justified in
tice which shews that the owner meant not to give such per : 
any such art to cause them so to do , or the
and the number and length of the words in some instances so
the 
be made Creditor for upon the supposition of his receiving 
Athanasius , but must , I think , be very
3
who to avoid preventing it sed set aside two Acts of
-of on the reception of each supernumerary and the other half on 
been :   _  had will been in the same place the thing would have 
Impostor ' s Mask . See  [ Punishments ] 
 : volence may much more than outweigh the 
serve only to bring the Law into contempt . 
as shall be found necessary to the said purpose  , in which 
31
-fore it is hereby farther agreed that the said Jeremy 
the person was that took it :  As if a stranger passing
Book of Adultery .
in his way the means of service .  _ 
has by Parliament been ordered to be set up for above these 
the catalogue of punishments .
Such , perhaps , may by some be conceived to be the less 
Extenuations
-ments of the several states of Milan , Modena , Genoa , Tuscany , the
Mr H . Addington presents his Compliments to Mr Bentham , and
give to the Offence . 
or for any term or terms determinable upon his 
nearer . But if there ' s no way of understanding our Author ; our  _ 
can be needful  :  +  when the Coinage is in a very bad State such a re= 
7 .
Bentham which formed the basis of the present agreement , 
 ' to more extensive dealings ; a circumstance which he foresees 
that a power should be given to the judicial Magistrate 
 ' as an advantage , they appear only to operate as an incitement 
such supernumerary , except in as far as the total number of 
it is only criminal devastation .
though he be not conscious of it , he shall be punished as if he knew 
Another scrape indeed , it must be confessed ,
follows
this be a needs be a Description singularly satisfactory ?  
have some Acquaintance with the Laws under which
 : ple , so striking and oppressive a preference given to the 
 ' opportunity of forwarding for their accommodation a share of such
annual proportion of the sum
it would make to the  voluminuousness  and intricacy of the
that of either of those crimes . 
By a stranger in this case is meant any 
any degree responsible , punish it severely at all events :  
traces of the fact in question appear to be imprinted ; in which
good deal aided by the difficulty or rather impossibility of meeting 
Confederacy is not punished as Coining ,
4 . Offences against Foreign Enemies in contempt of a Flag of 
Reasons .
as 
12
the contempt of others .
a small and transient Profit . 
 : nal Injuries :  and so on . 
persons to deal with will take up a considerable degree 
Majesty is enabled to give to such Overseer as above-
1 .
that they shall be made Creditors to the like amount in case of
6 . No Prisoner shall be suffered to have access to any kind of
of the maintenance of the said Establishment , shall during the 
Knowledge of the Subject , but which practical 
It is evident therefore that no place can be allotted to them
might exercise this right if she thought proper,upon terms
offering could be raind worthy of the chosen priest , 
 " The settlers in Lane Cove were so much  <gap/>  so perpetually alarmed 
fortune apparently at a rapid rate . He might nevertheless 
 : mount . 
of the Insolvent , nor the necessity of the Creditor are thought 
against 
Mr . Hiley Addington to Mr . Bentham  _ 
continue to pull the hand of his Noble successor , & 
invested with it .
is asked for , and which it is the Use of a
to which if forced back by salutary terrors , he may at any 
 " them forever after at my own price of 12 . " 
C 
if occasion shall require , it shall and may be lawful for his Ma-
C
2 . And that at the price proposed to be put upon it .
for his support when he has none . This goes by the 
Bentham and his said successors as a fund for a Superannuation
 : crease his profit ; but then what he gets in point of se= 
innocent is found guilty ; if they will do , their
present to observe , that it is not taken from any Difference
New Prison , the old and beggarly neighbour of the vastly
-nough . But here no such assurance is given until the very 
1 . From the fall of buildings . See Laws concerning ruinous build :  
part of the said Proposer for the purposes aforesaid , was de-
gradually , and in small numbers , as their terms expired .
ferr ' d 
stands distinguished by a particular name . 
lucre . In such Case he shall only be admonished ;
I say to expose himself :  but to shew how compleat 
such works will be considered in another place . 
any individual
When 
and
honest and sufficient livelyhood at all times after the expira-
members against those of any other state . 
of intention is apt perhaps to be not quite so palpable as 
gines they would err from ?  If rules that the creatures do not err 
or any material part of any such instrument in a condition to be 
This terror , so far as it is inspired by reason
appear to have an interest  [ in any house ] 
C 
es it only to a small , and inconsiderable 
 : on upon strangers :  but then he is exposed to continual 
injury to the liberty of loco-motion ,
hundred supernumeraries be committed in the first in-
at the least
to have it in one ' s possession or to apply it to any other pur= 
burnt . As he did to others , so shall it 
in any of those Qualities which if it had been committed
the former . 
reformatory part of the management of the said intended 
should happen should take upon him to draw a conclusive inference 
Such computation being made , the said Jeremy Bentham & 
Glosses and Explanations and Modifications & 
and  _  
as 
vicinity between the first and the second floors of 
encreasing according to the number of years during which 
7
made , it will in most cases be difficult to say what par=
 ' and provided '  ; Be it therefore further enacted by the Authority
 : tive of mischief in one way , at another time of another :  but at 
shewn none . I say Parliament :  for the mercy of even the King 
 ( being all that will remain of the said allowed sum of 
Sect . I . Law in General .
a man would scarcely be found to betray a coiner
 [  ( F )  Danger ]  to wit of being subjected to bodily pain or unea : 
his 
Class it is plain that the contents of it cannot be arranged in any 
and subservience thereunto . 
these circumstances are see in The Laws relative to things
dispute not culpable . In the present instance , for
 : ment or restraint for a time certain .
his own State disavows his conduct , and as a proof of such 
the Nature of the Act , is commensurate to the Term , 
2 . The obligation you are under to assist a fellow creature
for the purpose of causing to be erected thereupon one or more 
for the said intended purposes And Whereas in parti-
smaller 
ch . IV . An Act for the more effectual securing and encou-
in writing to be notified by the Pruncipal Secretary of State for 
Governor and his said Successors shall on the application of 
trade carried on on the account of individuals , the 
inconvenience 
do .
4
 ( 2 
C
is better it should be born by the state , than by individuals . It
 : cerning Storms .
state to enlist himself or to engage others to enlist in the 
 : tions be given which it tends to counteract , those regulations
is a sufferer in this way . In the account of dissipation , so
consent
to the House of Commons . At Portsmouth or
not less than 1 a day exclusive of lodging washing and firing :  
indeed 
upon their backs , sent there to learn as well as to teach a lesson 
 " heard of much discontent prevailing among them in consequence
System of them at a View ; by which means the reader may
 : tice puts it in his pocket and departs . Much
are exposed to suffer by , as happen to be connected and brought 
Quest :  IV . Why fraudulently uttering without 
 " degree and nature of the offence .  _  
for
Hawkers and Pedlars . To responsible persons it ought
this
stolen it 
As to any farther particulars relative to this head , they 
-such the language , which justice would naturally dictate to
sets the same ideal value on the ring that You
Offences against the external Security of the State .
fish , or soups , or other messes made of any such
ground will when purchased be according to the provision of 
such Prisoner , or at any subsequent period , the said intended 
27
- " ion of 1500 bushels of wheat , the whole was engrossed by
unbending rules of strict justice to be obeyed , the accumulated
amount to be accompanied by proper vouchers for the proof as well 
things that the Commissioners of the Treasury for the time be-
remaining thereon and occupied therewith :  And in default of
-ther :  it should be true of one as well as another of the things cha-
-sequent to it .
when there is evidently no chance of its being executed can 
enjoying or causing another to enjoy the benefit of being reputed to stand
# For if the Bystander in Question were in Confederacy
I purchase it . Meanwhile I have saved up
of expression which characterize a figured stile , than it can
This is inserted for the sake of distinguishing
allowing them a share of the produce .
 : strument which might contribute to exempt him from a burthen
Of Polygamy .
21
then let out upon condition of making that discovery volunta= 
from which they remain at present undistinguished .
C
10th . To provide them with spiritual & medical as-
Property or , in short , than any offence against Person and Property 
France . The Story is in the Causes Celebres .
Punishment
with other countries , when we see how he has observed his engagements 
you in another Dress the Thing to be defined  _ 
of these are mistakes concerning the probable matter of
68
He may be screwed into a press and in that plight exhibited 
since that time the prices of divers articles necessary
5 . If any person shall without lawful cause or excuse
 ( a ) 
is better , for the same reason that Inssurance Offices are beneficial .
 : tion of it than the English Legislator was who in the Statute of Will.III . 
against individuals to which we have given the name of Offences a : 
the same actions will follow . Even 
Note
- ' ation , in such Manner , and under such Penalties and 
damnified by such felony , encreasing according to the number 
for the sake of military service
case has the Opportunity of defending his Reputation
agreed that in pursuance of the said Act of the 7th of July 
it might appear . By himself a man of a given rank of life for= 
-come due untill one year after the day when the said intended 
of the whole fortune of the person whom he supplants or
the basis of the highest fortune a servant can ordinarily
general will not know ; and the apprehension of being plundered 
set  _  
of which the human mind is capable .
2
such supernumeraries , reckoning from the first , shall be encrea-
that call be called a thought  _  persons who are 
well for the internal tranquillity as for the external se=
at any other time after .
of the Slaves .  ( a )  
arm he was out of your reach and was bought within it
first place the being perpetually employed in finding out new 
The great mischief lies in the deceit put upon the Woman ,
# Omnis Definitio in Lege periculosa est _  I would
that every offender so removed shall continue in the place of con-
To this purpose a Heap of Things is
 " -tor of the tumil tumultuous scene , until the moment when 
Justifications are
to take out administration
9 P.68 . December 1797 .  " Ben-nil-ling ... . remains a silent specta- 
-raries upon the common plan ?  A second Penitent-
6
 " of , than add strength to the evidence adduced , when they find , as is
 : vidual to a burthen or a punishment , to which 
King and the substituting this tax in its stead , which 
within the limits thereof ; and is the rule of decision for
of such as are of a semi public nature :  and in the first place 
Majesty shall appoint under the management of any Overseer 
It is evident that it is only in as far as our own 
been men that would have knelt to both these 
establishment , the expence of which maintenance for 
measure of government or only supposed so to be . 
 : by intending to endanger the life or damage
or a half Guinea of a stranger without weighing it ; but a man 
said Jeremy Bentham to be Governor of the said hereby intend-
-penditure necessary for the same being accordingly made up 
to , the reduction made no difference with regard
may be sufficient to produce uneasiness in a man if it be
so long as men content themselves with sounds , may pass for true : 
of Portland , but too well established .  _  
Let the Judge take heed that he be not imposed upon by
 " they left on the spot , could be of any benefit to them . At 
 .  .  . A detailed & most masterly exposition of these is to be found
such as are noxious to his person as well as property . Under the
character of an enemy to the foreign state , the bringing on 
what some person or other of every Country may have some 
year his active beneficence had embraced and covered
 " For wheat , per bushel  _   _  8 shillings .
actions in the moral world , as between 
by the appearance of an unarmed man "  .
-fences will most of them be in that case in which the motive
 : ness . 
Exposition .
and one of them is to pave the way for the reception of important 
of his introduction .
has a right to have his business expedited first
* that this plan of the Duke of Portland ' s for crowding 
or information .
 :  : ful cause ]  a man is concerned in kindling Fire ,
Mint , whose report the Court of Appeal shall hear before they 
that no such building as it thus called upon 
of the said Stock and other personal Estate occupied with the same ,
 " soldiers being sent to their assistance , went out in the night ; 
found in the same place with any instrument calculated for 
the Insolvent by means of the ignominious Habit . 
 ( B )  
which the Forms require to be charged as a Fact contradistinct
X Of the four circumstances above enumerated the effect of the first ,
evidence put both points out of doubt . Fortunately 
or engaging to leave her such or such a Sum by his Will .
entirely open under the general Words 
such rule ?  or whether if he found by chance a creature erring from 
or by occasional Deputy shall be constantly living in 
armed , and where the execution of the Laws depend in
 -nada Base .
 " satisfactory , as it appeared that they expected an assurance from the governor 
Art 21 . To keep the management of the said intended 
not punished at the suit of the Wife , on account of the subor : 
contract may be termed Matrimonial Dessertion .
Of Defraudment
 : soever . 
rejected were to see of the not returning it "  an
-ported .  ( c )  
All which are inimical to a foreign state they
 ( b )   +  See p.17
Offences against Individuals .
we think quite clear , will lead us to see with greater 
to an individual  , as an article of food or cloathing  ; 
Home Department , to appoint one or more fit and 
For the course of his argument , having used some words which
described , and appointing a Feoffee for the making purchase 
to be postponed for two years instead of one , then
letter , to which the plan thus alluded to has 
Wife is made an Excuse in favour of the Man .
was completed in this month . In the abundance that was expected ,
 : ther . A man who can do nothing for example but dig , 
the dice turn up one way rather than another .
end you had in mind was the exposing him to contempt . If for
 " same be had in due & convenient time without
manifested .
It may occur on the other side that domestic Coin is the
the amount of the profit which he made or attempted to
he may not have done any thing amiss at all  ; and in the o= 
mind to punish an act , and he cannot tell why , he calls it an 
without dispute the friend of the wearer of the pocket
as the word  " Cabalistical "  or any other 
consisted in the exercise of that liberty which the law of the land
the impression it makes to the party ' s disadvantage is
 " He likewise informed them , that he had much pleasure 
if no owner can be found for it he will then have a title .
judging of the propriety of the recommendation , or
letter , and the will of Parliament , as declared in the Acts , 
state thereof , at least in so far as the Public on behalf of the
laden with such a Bag , or by making a Dog to
obedience a good servant has something in it of persons 
 ( A ) 
It is however the pretty certain consequence  ; unless 
reduced to one hundred , then the addition shall not be paid in 
the term have the powers incident to the office of 
the persons in in a state make for the rest . Meantime it was this 
said Act might if some provision were not herein & hereby 
the crop .
 the streets in moveable stalls or barrows and are called
Devisee or Devisees of such Survivor as aforesaid and in default
Parents and Children , Law of Guardians and Wards , &c . &c .
Character of Buonaparte . Extracted from Mr Pitts speech , delivered in the 
more severe than for open Threats of Personal Injury un : 
7
to the offender , he knows well enough when he is guilty without danger
the offender :  here you will have no chance .
 ' ideas , or a desire of indulging in dangerous gratifications , 
thus insinuated by a gentleman who , I dare answer
receptacles for petty offenders , the improved hands 
some rare and ornamental work of Art . Who for instance could
 : ting to get by industrious means what is necessary 
worth his while to examine it with ever so little attention :  so that the 
be added to the one hundred , untill the number of supernumera-
during 
 " prices of grain , directed in future that the following should be 
said Successors with power to appoint an umpire .  _  
or lucre . 
and ninety-four and of his Majesty ' s Reign the thirty fourth 
-cient allowance for the expence of building  , fitting and stocking 
of efficacy as in the more favourable situation of 
melting pots , stamping engines
of unlawful Homicide , as the case may happen ; if it be intended
respective conditions .
Captain Collins )   " were allowed to quit the Colony in these ships : 
-tatives . But no such line of distinction was ever 
 ' from the Secretary ' s office within such respective Colony or Plant-
officiates in his room the name of such Deputy is the name
To be omitted
seized of the premises at and from the term of such
to that purpose shall be supplied at least once a year with 
of 1779  _  in so far as the confinement of Convicts of a certain 
different determination according to the Laws & Customs of different States . 
be done to him . 
As to acts
In states or confederacies of states in which the ju : 
Lords Commissioners , the other by the said Jeremy
stand
in a year shall be taken at the Hulks- such is
2
4 .
for a thing pretended to be of equal but which in fact is of 
10
stop the issue of it !  For corruption , no my Lord : 
proper to confine in the Panopticon :  it is impossible to ascer-
 [ Co-offenders ] 
of
 " various times been killed by the natives ; but , could these peo-
 " settlers in Lane-Cove , burning a house and felling some hogs belong-
Article of Food or Cloathing  , or occasional only :  provided the time 
at the Time or after )  of keeping it two Days or
to contribute by their own money to the improvement of the said 
as , having passed the limits of the Characteristic 
A Definition should be composed of terms that 
the affirmative ; for that it was peculiarly calculated
liable
them inof a town
a negative , by forbearing to do something which he is 
which money is made , round blanks of the dimensions of 
 : ploy in the view of drying up this source of mischief . 
two persons who play with dice is that neither
a married couple either party betakes himself or herself out of
-ent , and shall cause to be inserted in such Contract or 
The French tyrants if they had no justification had at least 
3 . Any engine which he knows to be a Press for Coinage . 
and the whole tract of ground they occupy , the Neighbourhood . By 
Which A
incessantly keeping them in view .
of a Law , thereby shewn to be of such a Nature as
done to the prejudice of one ' s own state  :  it can hardly be
it before the shopman ' s face . Much more if he takes
of the Law .
to be that expressed in the above two Clauses .
Of Mathematicians let us borrow the appellation :  and let us saying ;
If , from any cause , it should have happened that you have not yet 
them :  so that on this occasion , as on all others , 
hundred . 
intending
aforesaid and in default of such Devisee or Devisees then 
repugnant to the principles of natural justice and good faith  _  
Of Frauds relative to the Coin .
her Majesty ' s government
whose possession or custody the thing is to know the
of the same  , may reasonably be computed to have saved to the pub-
of the views which gave it birth , two points may
 : out any express convention , but from the nature of the 
-spectively contracted for , accompanied with a comparative 
and dated the 22nd day of March 1784 it appears that according 
shopkeepers whose trades are apt to occasion danger or annoy=
Of Disturbance of Guardianship .
a pretty compleat Bastile :  a key only being put into the
 : our , of the Falsity or Deceitfulness whereof he him : 
Offences against the National Interest in general
only to be applied for the 3rd offence or in very gross cases
-soners ]   " to those whom the House of Correction was originally 
9
of such escape , irresistible violence from without excepted :  pro- 
intitled An Act for erecting a Penitentiary House or Houses for 
Offences against the external Security of the State .
But our business at present is only with the politi-
instead of 40 , 39 , then he will have to receive to the said am-
in
ask him and be at the trouble of taking it
said House , and dated the twenty second day of March 1784 
is punished with Forfeiture , and so forth  _  But
16
would somewhat puzzle a Man using the Language of 
 : out cause . It is probably for certain services . Those services in 
20 or 21 times as much as in the case of Cold Bath 
therefore it is further agreed that in pursuance of the said 
Furtherance of Justice . See Fit :  Execution .
appellation of a local calamity .
imitation of Montesquieu . Montesquieu
Perjury . Add to this that before the case comes before a Jury a man
be paid for any other such supernumerary , except in as far as 
too dangerous :  it was a case not to be trifled with . 
Clerks , &c , who will be very numerous , stocking the 
Agreement takes the Plow from B ' s House
-information .
the
there be any one single man in the nation who will accept 
The King ' s Majesty ' s Declaration to his subjects concerning lawful
1 . He may be banished the presence of the husband or that 
Governor for necessary cloathing furnished by him to the said
 : ed in contracting for the making , or repairing , or purchasing , 
generally attended to :  the multitude will be always govern :  
 , not a jot
two acts are there . Two Acts both of them to provide
years . An account of a set of extensions more or less nume-
or their custody , by the direction of his Majesty , His Heirs 
a moderate punishment , may have its use . It may  <gap/>   <gap/>  be
 " of vice and profligacy that can be imagined . " *
15th To  
Exposition 
as if I was to corroborate you , or you was to 
reaping grain sufficient to supply the colony with bread for two
allowed to put him away and marry again , or the power
Jeremy Bentham for himself his Heirs , Executors and Admi- 
is the stronger the greater the danger appears to be which threatens
-by made to the contray take possession of the whole
our question recurs with equal 
 ' that they may have occasion for at a very moderate expence ;
upon the Wife to her separate Use for her Life ,
the continuance of a suit . With regard to the person of 
possible consistent with it , being in ordinary cases more 
punishment that can be employed against an Offence so circum=
 " enter into Covenant with her "   _   ( a point of Doctrine 
Robbery a Man may get all the money You have ; it 
The gentleman had not then by any means made up his mind
 " Wholsome Food "  would be reposing too great 
punishment :  a circumstance wholly inconsistent with their 
THEFT
well as  " authorizing "  such House or Houses to be 
This however will not form any exception to the precision and com :  
5
Of Incendiarism .
to decisions that have been given by English Lawyers
do , the person for instance whose hair is in it
mentioned Engagements :   _ - Eexcept from some late issues 
same period continue to be made unto the person or persons so 
 " being , it was hoped , now at an end , the governor , conceiving it
which
the offender committed the injury at his leisure .
committed to his care , above the stipulated number 
may suppose equivalent to it .  _  I made choice in 
upon the said Panopticon plan , of proper form and 
it be by the immediate notion of the  <gap/>  
also of any friend or friends of that person for a time or forever . 
maintenance they are complaisant enough to submitt to ,
them to undo their own undoings , & get Parliament
die fast enough in the Prison  ?  Should no mortal 
any default on the part of the said Proposer Now there- 
 hundred or more than two hundred  . 
discussed below under the Head of Estimation .
on the footing of a Widow . In point of reason she ought not to
period , whereupon he the said Jeremy Bentham shall be intitled
-lic - may be mentioned without reserve :  & it is
H . p . xlvi 
instant inevitable and indelible injury to life
If we look to see this rule observed by our Author , we shall be disap -
 : pose . If then any person who is not of any such set takes 
Art.12 . A Chaplain , being a clergyman of the 
ardour
so that instead of damaging or destroying it
such and such
-stantly keeping the whole assemblage of them in view .
 " forbear to convict the guilty . This is a most salutary consequence
under circumstances so little favourable to the use of it ?  Whence ?  
C
 " object of "  them .  _  
of the Judge before whom the prosecution for extortion
 " After the end of divine service our good People may
expence of which maintenance for the first year was included in 
in manner following :  viz :  
The difference , it is true , is rather apparent than 
Prisoners , and on the other hand Debtors to the said amount 
p . 208 The 4th , That the law and legislative government of
 ' settlers in New South Wales , have reached Norfolk-Island .  _  
rather more advantageous to her than to the Husband . 
discipline of these good jails are to such a degree 
SECT . I . Law in general .
 " in which many of them had been destroyed ...... .
 " settlement by the murder of John McIntire in the year 1790 ; 
Arbitrators , one to be chosen by Government , 
pay for it in a Month _  C knowing of this
term
First with regard to Seduction . The disgrace brought upon
17 March 1792 .
for the purpose of purchasing the same And Whereas he the 
-ount of the premiums for insurance herein 
is not the Case with any Solutions of the metals used as ingredients in 
the fair or current price of the like articles at the said former 
the inhabitants thereof , as near as may be agreeable to
man :  a medicine out of the way of a sick man :  or a catheter out of
As to the cases where it is necessary that his 
the general Title . 
must be capable of being rendered very severe : 
caution 
which men are willing to pay to crimes attended with success , to wickedness
C
year of our Sovereign Lord George the 3d , by the 
A Traveller goes into a room in an Inn sees a tea 
at the least having been given of such readiness 
 : ed and partly covered over with dirt :  if then he takes 
to any measure of government  , a man is concerned  [ with o=
influence of such a preservative Prisoners may not 
Economy
business , in at least one instance  ( for they had done 
can serve for any Thing , like they come to be
-lity of materials used in the construction of the said Build- 
aforesaid , That all Commanders of Private Ships of War ,
to bring the improved English prisons in question 
r
V .
 " humane directions had been too often frustrated by circum-
 : ion in a public manner , for any person whatsoever except 
and consequently double the expence , of that which , by the ac-
area in which all those others are inscribed .
some time secured into the store , there were found at this period six
=cise 
contribute to exempt him from a burthen or a pu=
such supplemental allowance as is herein also mentioned , 
might pass off unperceived . For this purpose a word could not
2 . The greatness of the danger will depend upon a great
The 
Stock were not to be the property of the said intended Mana-
of the 27th ultie desiring , by command of your Lordships , to be
 " him who prescribes it , commanding what it 
a hypothetical one :  - let him convert it into a cate-
confined to a room within the reach of the
Moreover in case of any dispute touching the a-
of filial
Bentham and his Representatives shall at any time 
directed to such Overseer appoint Now therefore it is further 
mercy are in Your Lordship ' s hands  _  grudge not a
for the building  , it is not true , nor any thing like 
a very elevated one :  the addition of Contractor has 
a middle course might be pursued , and the sum total of
 " in the mean time , by continuing to labour for the public , they would 
 : pleat degree the apprehension , which such a Law would excite in al= 
above mentioned . _  
pay Mr B ' s Representatives for all the Buildings , 
it
5 . As to so much of the Confinement to hard labour as exceeds the 
well protected Governor :  a personage who , if he does
graphical or graphical or
it remained a doubt whether it could be accomplished to any considerable extent .
pp 17 in the whole to page 14 by James -  " 24 May 10th
complicated :  owing partly to what Intricacy of it ' s natural
Conciseness the effectuating of which was the 
With regard to the Copper Coin every body knows that 
colony and availed themselves of its necessities . _ 
themselves against suffering  ( especially to any material a=
 : ence of such causes .
C
to  _  
ought ever to have been suffered to return ?  An ill behaved
the expences of fitting up and stocking the said Establish-
is most perfectly inexplicable . If guided by his own untutored & 
defeating one of the declared objects of another Act  _  the Act
Bentham or his said Successors , with power to ap-
 " which prices were to commence on the first day of January 
9 4
Middlesex Justices to his Grace about 16 Months before , on the 
Expression which a scrutinizing Reader  ( and such
C
which must come heavy at first before there are 
Peltiers Trial p . xxi Edit . 1803
may be cases in which nothing less will serve , it is fit 
Captain Collins will inform us . Speaking of the month
Note .
Of Theft or Stealing .
list . Whence then , it may be asked ; comes this language , and
Extortion
The words  " wholesome Food "  should be 
inflicted in such a Manner as to answer the End in an 
I say every Convict :  for what individual Convict breathing
 [  ( C )  Hindering ]  It matters not by what means . See Tit .  [ Matri=
 : ed with the Guardianship , See in the Law of Guardians and Wards .
2 . Where this is the Case with any person that is dear to the 
-ance had there been any such person in existence . An Acct of 
let him have it ?  All this while this Fortune
as 
employing and reforming Convicts .
afterwards made by the said Architects would for the said 
render You compleat Justice . When You have
bed and bedding competent to his situation and kept in a 
if not obtained by Fraud , does some Act with the
 : ed , and spread all over the dominions of the state , what=
1 . He shall be made to do Penance more or less public.x 
all degrees of responsibility from the very lowest to the 
are apt to be concerned in , give the Judge a latitude 
Quest . VIII . Why the indelible Stigma is here
drawing , painting and the like .
 [  ( A )  Suggestions ]  It matters not in what manner
from
2 . If he omits to take such measures as he has reason to 
a Woman thus imposed upon suffers in her fortune . Perhaps
the times at which they were respectively contracted for , accompa-
rights is where a person without lawful cause is concerned in
in it ' s Room .
word - is to blame . What is on record- what is pub-
 In the anecdote , besides the main point , we see another ex-
only  _ 
labour of Convicts instead of the more advantageous
1 . By attacking in public any person in authority with 
But popular prejudice is seldom perfectly equitable to
7
but that which eventually took place would accomplish : 
it may happen that all are in the same case . It depends 
 " consideration the difficulties under which they labour ; which 
face , believing you to be at the point of death , or too poor to
by Howard ' s Books , and by the Reports made
-deration of the sum of twenty seven thousand pound to be 
but estimate .  _  
26
Manufacturers of Oil of Vitriol , Tanners , Tallow Chandlers ,
to appoint an extrao dinary punishment which could ap=
 " trust to them . " 
for the said hereby intended number of 1000 prisoners the
Instead of having an Estimate made 
erected .  _  
Mr Bentham ' s note on No 9 :  written 27 Aug . 1802
 : ture :  instead of being the pleasure of acquisition it
expected to take place among the Prisoners in the course of 
suppose )  canot read and knows not the value 
is not by any means a sufficient allowance for the expence 
the exposure is  _  & that on both sides  _  subsequent 
point of economy , is necessary for reformation . But 
#  This whole Aphorism might be exprest more 
-tively in arrear . 
after the day when the said intended Establishment shall be 
C 
trust to permit the same to be occupied and enjoyed by the 
 : gence . 
to be Governor of the said hereby intended Penitentiary House 
 " being 
that
-y of an Impostor .
other . 
C
  : cept
other Officer of Justice in pursuance of his authority , or by 
The expence of such establishments is an
deters men from coming to assist . 
 [  ( A )  Right ]  Justifications are 1
of two ways , a positive way and a negative :  a posi :  
him . But then the punishment should be moderate :  it should not in=
 : tirely 
common honesty ; that the County would not be made 
in 
release himself from all moral  controull  controul , must for the time
together that appear to be of the same die this circumstance 
 : poses of amplitude exactness and regularity ; the following 
THEFT
of Portland would have been , had he done what he has 
an assembly with the consent of the governor and 
have 
If the litigious delay should have proceeded from or been ac=
sake 
the question be put to him at the time of the taking , or
extenuation
directions limitations & restrictions as are contained
never brought forward , than this which has been
4 . From the Explosion of Gunpowder . See Laws concerning the 
is more diminished in the female than in the male .
might and perhaps ought to be created or distinguished
 " excellency , expressed himself disrespectfully of the lieutenant-governor , he was 
atrocious Laws of France against Acts of the same
of their sentences . From this statement it seemed reasonable to
Next 
1 . Any mould or other instrument which he knows to be cal= 
the greater ,
might be inflicted on all such as were parties or privies to the 
 : ing which . 
Much more if he takes measures to prevent its being known : 
great degree inferior to good ones . But neither in England nor 
THEFT .
known . 
is in his power to guard himself effectually against suf=
be threatened openly , a man may guard against it by 
in all the British Leeward Islands , yet , through the
Dispensing Power
now after receipt of the authority for stopping them 
 : bery it may only drive him back to Button making .
to the details proper to be observed in those registers this is a
 " if he did not go away , and leave them a small two-oared
enemies as laying aside their hostile disposition for a 
not Bishops ?  I mean in process of time :  though
-veniences , errors , and absurdities , the Jews , the 
have been prudent to have touched as a supply , except in a case
40
affrontive manner to a gentleman the gentleman
Of Simple Personal Injuries .
produce any mischief extensive enough to be entitled to the
expect 
to he
nations , he would have seen , into what incon- 
 [  ( B )  Carnal knowledge ]  Carnalis notilia duobus absolvitur :  penetra=
 : ally speaking there is no knowledge in the case ; that there is 
any kind of current money . 
Art.10 . 
great part , perhaps the greatest part , staid abroad :  and ,
As this Article now stands , after the decease 
page or two farther on . +  It there means either to speak,to write 
II Collins Extracts Supplement 
remembered than downright defamation and reproach but
much as , in that letter , he declares in express terms that he 
thing at play , that is , at any game or wager
 2 . Nor does it matter for what time :  whether forever or only
-racterized by the term to be defined :  it should be such as may con
Note .
 : ment may be sure to meet with it . This can only
in virtue of his office , gives the party to understand that he
the mischief it may accordingly occasion him to com= 
6
whom he has it in his power to remove and being admonished 
and adapt to the purpose aforesaid a building of a new and pe-
behalf of his Majesty of the one part and Jeremy 
In these different nations several differences may possibly 
residence it is termed local . 
Art.21 . To keep the management of the said intended 
Quest . VI . Why the Punishment is no severer ? 
in on or about the 17th of March 1793 And Whereas since 
-crease with age . Two such circuits in one year 
to 
-lar Act  _  by a priviligium which he wishes to see
task the greater the glory :  he might then promote
that she liked the counterfeit husband better than the real . This happened in
Devisee or Devisees of such Survivor as aforesaid and in 
 " two years had elapsed since our departure from England , several convicts 
it la alludes to a gorve government by laws in being , and 
the End in ordinary Degree of preventing it .
does the Penalty :  which Penalty , so as to be 
he cannot be said absolutely to intend not to
it shall and may be lawful for his Majesty  , His Heirs 
to try offences against them . 
to render a like account of every such reduction 
certain  [  +  ] 
till now . Not only had this most obvious precaution been neglected ,
as may be made visible to those whom they are addressed to :  it
be the case if at the time of your beginning to move your
between this man of all-work and his guardian superior in 
has still an owner and knows or has reason to suspect who
 + APHORISM 1st
sequestration in various degrees of perfection , up to 
8 . From Persons insane :  See Laws concerning persons 
 " the scarcity which they themselves had occasioned , had raised the
some fact upon the supposition of which , and
gentleman .
destroying or weakning the power of the moral sanction :  that
C
is more or less material to the party injured to stand well 
1794 Ch . 37 .  _  And Whereas the delay from whence such 
or such of its contents as are damageable by
6
the whole of his confinement to hard labour or from 
is , that in regard to the main object  _  the object 
Of Polygamy .
their going into any of those Ports or Harbours , be subject
5 . From Fire . See 1 . Laws concerning buildings 2 . The House : 
of Colonies who , with whatever views , pitched upon this un-
For Insolvency in despite of Justice the Offender might 
now to manifest itself . On this day sailed for Canton this
C
C
false pretenses of necessity . Such a necessity can seldom happen
Of Idleness .
-dinates as also a proper and sufficient Infirmary shall be 
said Lords Commissioners as also the said Lord Commis- 
Art . 22 . And Whereas by a Report made to the 
alling Transport and Ordnance Bills or Debentures :   _  
 : bery or committed in prosecution of a design to commit 
that each individual may be responsible for his own acts and
-mediately and irrecoverably granted to all who were or 
the Value of the matter in dispute .
a present pain . But then on the other hand this is all
species of delinquency have this in common that the 
to be so great as the apprehension a man feels at knowing 
4 . Those of a Domestic Preceptor over his Pupil  . See Law of
Art.17 . In case of Escape the said Jeremy Bentham 
the designation of the place is in different instances so different
 : ed for the general damage at the suit of the prosecutor gene : 
The Insurance as now proposed by Mr . B . 
-poses And Whereas in praticular the price of bricks 
Aphorism 4th
C
to do the Act which is to be governed by them , or they
3 . She may be made to pay something by way of a=
obvious to ourselves , declared & 
it is a species of Family Imposture .
the end requires he lays on a Tax . 
it , being matter of enquiry )  a dispensing power , viz :  that of
Art 13 . So in like manner a Surgeon under whose 
have Laws prescribed or dictated to them :  is a proposition , which 
Feoffee appointed for that purpose by the King ' s Ma-
you will still remain as to the greater part
4
Establishment would be in great measure wanting , And 
would be fairer to let that matter be referred to 
I dare not promise , that such as I have respectively
Minister in England :  my inference is that there ought
way to a clear knowledge of Jurisprudence 
code of laws , yet knowing that it has never 
of universal rottenness  _  ripe by the rotting of the 
of Foreign Ministers . Were a person permitted to do an 
proper , be kept under the inspection of any person or number 
of such a nature in a building of such construction 
 " governor being determined to put that article of his Majesty ' s 
is where the same sort of act is liable at one time to be produc= 
in the one case than in the other . 
would be by contract , has been induced to make public 
68
general idea .
prescribes , and he who is bound to obey ,
having made out as he flatters himself to demonstration 
for a certainty , in no Instance , of the Number . 
=lar being asked whether he has taken kept or destroyed it
committed in the first instance , and the number be afterwards 
cable with equal propriety either to the Principal or to His Substitute
Extenuation
have seen no private letter from you :   _  
Exposition
such view as that of preventing the return of Convicts - at least
off , not only knowingly but avowedly ; since it is not at all 
2 . The he assumed and exercised the power of punish-
1 . He may be banished the presence of the person ravished as 
bound to render a certain service to another in a certain occasion
Report of an address to the Throne , approving of the Preliminaries of
he would have were there no currency in paper . Now the great=
we are not to conceive that the Act of Stealing is deficient
the smallest wish to see it remedied had ever been
follows .
 : powder or other stores , mercury , peruvian bark or other specific 
A personal Insult , the more public it is , the more 
articles could have been sent out for from England , with every
Sect . I . Law in General .  ( 5
16 .
which I shall give the Title of Anomalities 
abuse , for the recommendation of the persons by whom
and even make amends in most instances for any accident of its 
56
to the offence than to the offender . Where the Offence is such 
will therefore appear still stronger & more unquestionable 
which the above in an Abridgement  _   " The felonious
 " Irons for the space of six months .  _  
NOTE
to be
gentleman -
 : ence to this head coincide undistinguishably with those made
 " some of the large horned cattle "  . 
 " shipping for this country , subjecting the masters to certain 
4 .
to make signs to :  He has given him in the first place all sorts of  _  
facility of evading the Law will be such as to strip it of all 
 : ment for wrongfully wasting or usurping a 
permanent practices , such as the carrying on of dangerous , offen=
For the following Offences every man , not acting by au= 
P . 92 . February 1796 .  " A general muster took place on the
general so extremely feeble by the time they arrived , that scarcely one in a
5
of such Penitentiary House or Houses when built with such 
intending not to be amendable to Law but what are here mentioned and 
practise it upon our own  . 
understanding .
the undertaking , and eventually a much larger 
that is he may act counter to his own interest in either of two 
whether obtainable or not obtainable , he would him-
 ( for to whom else could they have been directed ?  )  Papers thus 
3
of the mode of reference to be adopted on an occa : 
An officer is to be deemed to have given the party 
Aggravations . 
 " thither , in quest of the boats and their crews ; sending in her
but it will not be so great as at first sight might appear . 
charge , on condition of his being made Debtor to the amount 
 ( 1 
House standing by itself , if the value of it
Of Idleness .
to his Majesty that he would be graciously pleased to appoint the 
 (  we will suppose sufficiently evinced by his Conduct
Instructions to the Legislator .
number of instances in which counterfeit Coin is passed off , al= 
slip from him , and another slide into its place ; how is it that his 
-struction but for obedience - the Act his Grace has so well 
whether your Lordship ' s or whose else I am unable 
qualify it in another ?  
strictness he has no right to take it
19 . 
-ions as his Majesty shall under the powers of the said Act 
But this presumption may be defeated by
March 1800 , the Treasury , on the ground of a preparatory 
the agent , it may be perfomed either by a regular offi=
C
by nothing but a name :  nor even by name shall
with a separate bed and bedding of sufficient warmth , & kept in 
animals and parts of animals as are usually em-
with interest at the rate of 5 per cent from the 
certain Detour , which this does not , to the Accomplishment
to such concerns , the pride as well of sovereigns whose 
as aforesaid and with power to appoint an umpire . 
2 . For the second offence  he may be made to wear the A=
of Parliament , if necessary , obtained for it , he would 
such allowance shall not begin to become due untill one year
a Noble Secretary hias appeared to act , a gentleman 
P . 274 :  December 1799 .  " The settlers , being dissatisfied 
a Thief into a Robber . Such would be the case if the Punish= 
 [ 14 ]   [ 
from such premises would be justly accused of rashness :  what shall 
exclude mischievous ones .  _  
11 . 
supposing it not to have mistaken the 
loss is not to his own country , but to that to which the Coin pur= 
in the latter . 
 : der pain of death the use of certain metallic substances . These substances
What is said of Law in general , we naturally expect to find agree  _  
for the utter  " relinquishment "  of the whole concern ;  _  the said
abuse
VI .
Of the calamities which a Neighbourhood may be exposed to , the
affected by an injury , especially by a personal insult , done 
Colony , would not be quite so useless as it is if a pair of Right 
 ( E ) 
seen plainly to be false .
his accomplices , in what subterfuge will they find so much 
be eager to
fact . 3 . If notwithstanding that the dog was mad at
would have been Theft for they saw plainly that in point
or intended it constitutes in like manner a separate of=
 : es of Justice must be performed either upon the person of 
deal worse than the Cold Bath Fields Prison , if it be true , as I
obstructing relief :  as by removing bread out of the way of a hungry
5 .
that
to his own 
persons either or both of them for a certain time .
2 .  _  Of taking pleasurable exercises that require an un=
 -cessity in New South Wales .
worth 
to put off if not the whole yet more or less of it , u=
These being the two plans _ grounded on the two rival 
 : sition on any body in future . His abode , wherever it was ,
=ment from so much of it the offender will have no motive
for several years together . 
concerning the Plague &c . 
=tributing to the punishment of a servant than of a
estimated and the punishment of it determined . But these
personage  _  more of them than he cares to think of  _  on the score 
in , as will naturally expose him in some degree to suspi=
of the person robbed , together with the more distant 
in manner following  :  viz :  
away  [ of the personal goods of another ]  which
II Collins Extracts 
at first sight that where a man counterfeits foreign Coin , the 
As to arbitration , it is what Mr Bentham pro-
No 9 
-scribed it to contempt .  _  
Of Adultery .
Quest . 1 . Why Family Imposture is punished with
Letter 3d
 ' little comforts , as accidental ships may have brought hither . But ,
 " Here then you have the Penitentiary Plan for the 
of the Panopticon Penitentiary House requiring as 
as for Theft ,
concisely , but whether with sufficient precision 
Church of England , shall be provided who in person 
disabled were any of the parts necessary to generation : 
and other irremoveable improvements of every kind made in or
Of Personal Insults .
quarters of
a man ' s engaging in the act in question in the circumstances 
-rities against abuse . 
would naturally tend  _  not only to check that spirit of im-
Note .
his or their custody  , by the direction of his Majesty , his Heirs or Suc-
C
The circumstances of different Nations are incidents 
res gestae , in a relation to this his  " improved Colony . " 
 " own ideas and customs ; and , indeed , they loudly threatened 
every man in a manner must feel , that , if he pleases , it 
-upon one or more Penitentiary House or Houses , for 
upon 
2 . Laws relative to the several sorts of manufacturers or
a 
these
both kept and broken  _  kept by some & broken by others : 
62
trial . 
 : ed for :  in this the interests of Liberty principally ; but in 
a second time all poison into her bosom ?   _  After all 
any sort of satisfaction for these losses . Such are
the Lord High Treasurer or
In no state of things could a remedy so violent and hazard= 
 : als . Where there is no special damage therefore , the Offender can only be
Extortion
and recognized so that , by his own shewing , he kept them
engagements , & such the uniform and systematic breach of them ,  _  that 
assistance on such an occasion , unless when he had a
the instant it is in danger . It is not absolutely certain
for a certain time . 
70
C
Coin : 
 " for less than half its value . To whom did he dispose of it !  
 : reign to that in hand . Nor with respect to every one of 
Art.20 . To bind the attention of the said Jeremy 
be fixed ,
employed at the public mint for giving to the money 
for what number they were to be made . Faithful to 
being a compliance with the respective laws it is no more
60
Account of it shall be deemed conscious of having
discovery in the part of his confederates :  who must in a 
Now when the marketable price of the thing 
In any of the above cases of Excuse the Offender
and the accuser should each put his seal upon the goods 
and upwards :  such sums to be paid to any person or persons 
upon him to fashion any portion of matter in the view of 
8
in writing to be notified by the Principal Secretary of State for 
But here again another Question
the reception of 900 Prisoners according to the plan prescribed 
frauds committed on another sort of Metals used as Coin ; 
 _  to look at it , and , on pretence of correcting it , to
a Year Your Lordship and he together will be able
4
 : course contained therein )  may be spurious without being false : 
this Offence here , for the sake of narrowing the Notion of
bestowed upon any such low object any thing 
was required on the part of the said proposer for 
 : pon other people :  for , singular indeed must have been 
 " the natives were assembled for the purpose ; and he received in their 
while surely to have said so . To denounce a punishment 
5 .
Report .
 " This man  [ Ben-nil-long ]  instead of making himself useful ,
wit on the part of the Wife .
 " of all his other possessions . " 
stop all but a few favorites . The difference was that 
must attend , and must understand the business ,
3
to possess a House for a certain time , may any of them  ( if the other 
she
day and of the month which cannot but be left in blank for in
of his pocket , and the gentlemen out of whose
purposely
 [ as we have seen already ) 
 : iour in question was conveyed to the person
41
this is the case it is generally owing to the indifference with 
 " two or three of these opulent traders , to the exclusion and 
4
 ( C )   ( D )   ( E ) 
that he who could divest himself at once of all moral feeling , and 
this which is a farther circumstance that contibutes to
 " motion , of gravitation , of optics , of mechanics , as well as the Laws 
unwillingly accept the counterfeit Coin , and if it stays upon 
to usurp power , but property . It is not like Treason the Crime
From circumstances such as these either singly or
 : taking work . 
83
APHORISM 6th .
him by this means . 
which the uneasiness is produced :  the touch however slight
half pl palace , in Cold Bath Fields :  What he says of it is
general 
 : on to compel the Sovereign or any person in authority 
2 . He may be imprisoned . 
sufficient magnitude for the confining maintaining and em- 
his term , it is moreover agreed that , on the discharge of every 
 : ceed
the Sovereign or those who act under his authority . It requires
then begin with
slight circumstance will make it appear as if the owner had
If a man attack with Defamation or verbal abuse a 
to clear the Gaol , the prisoners are let out all at once . Once 
not therefore to be put under a separate title . They fall
C
intitled to take out administration as aforesaid :  And all such
by dishonest practices ,  [ let him take heed at his peril and ]  at least 
15
In the increase of space for separation , 
Case , whether this has or has not happened ?  and secondly 
it is up high in favour :  and - what is beyond
The second must be built for the greatest probable
3 .
the advantage which truth has over falsehood . When
3 . When in order to commit the Offence Advantage is taken of the
74
Preceptors and Pupils . 
=sons only  ; as a Paper containing nothing but memorandums 
powerfully a man is acted upon in direction by other
against accidental error as well as against criminal falsification
 " they were told to wait until account could be received from England ; & 
about , as towards the perpetually silent and mo-
toward the application of a remedy , howsoever that 
 : nishment rise and fall with the profit upon any single 
where there is a public establishment for the poor .
Class to which the greater part of thieves will belong will be made to work 
-sary for the maintenance of the said Establishment the 
French , that of slenderness ; as in the word finesse . Fi=
in proportion take up more expence and time . Bad money 
their natural bent where the police is feeble and half
such latter supernumerary  :  as for example if two 
 : sons at large , in a time of military Necessity . See Martial
the increase yet th of live stock & will probably more than 
the condition is constituted . It is only on person or property that cala=
 " persons "  . This , by way of answer to an humble address 
some sort or other , profitable or not profitable in 
ought not for the first offence to be applied to persons of
together with the economical state thereof  , at least in so far as 
to find advocates and intercessors among the friends and
 -dinances , for want of a Court
price set upon it by the Judge , which pro=
THEFT
the mildest way of preventing their doing it in an 
1 . If he omits to take such measures as he has reason to think 
-vision were not herein and hereby made to the contrary take 
The Use of the Word Theft is governed by the
who had not a right , was the same :  the same under the
Excuse II .
Prisoners
The above plan seems the best accomodated to the pur= 
be expected to take place among the Prisoners in the course of
means of separation for Convicts of different descriptions :  
now stands , after the decease of Mr . B . & 
taxes , fees , gratuities and other deductions whatsoever and with 
14 .
I mean , my Lord , the Act which was calling upon him 
to get work that a man continues without employment , 
No 2 . P . 202 . March 1799 . The settlement was at this time much 
-emplification of the spirit of injustice with which the whole system
and finished :  and the case of Battersea Rise affords 
shame or scruple . When a party was once engaged in a negotiation , & 
suffer for it . Now to make him suffer for it in the 
-ment of New South Wales .
unnoticed by his own system of Jurisprudence
 : ing as that of laying a country under wa=
 : nishment ; or to the State only , as an instrument 
decease of the Survivor of the said Jeremy and the said Sa-
As
publish at his own expence , a Report , exhibiting 
want of being sufficiently apprised of these )  proposes 
standing
times be found to have undergone a considerable enhancement 
-mount in case of recapture . 
 " by the unbounded extravagance of the labouring people , who had , 
degree by the interruption which such outrages might 
was inflicted  _  
Observations .
rank and figure and reputation of the persons who are 
to be subject to the jurisdiction of our own State that any 
XX
and in that only . If after pretending thus to fix it he lets it  _  
They both agree in representing it as
the untying , or even the cutting it ?  _ 
8th . To convert the prison into a school , and by an 
 : ratively very slender  ; such proof unless by some very ex=
hereby intended Penitentiary House or Houses when 
21 69
 " they might be represented to him in writing ; and , to spare
person supposing them to belong to the Jew .
any
Thirdly , the total absence of all signs of dis-
the said Jeremy Bentham for and during the 
at the bottom of it ?   _  
38
birth is never in any likelyhood of being performed in pre=
been expelled ?   _  Corrupted , as you yourself alledge  _  corrupted 
 " place this iniquitous combination in its proper light . 
it is not customary for the occupier of the land to make a profit
prisoner ' s committing any felony after his discharge , there shall 
& those of disobedience unpunished less so than 
first day of every term by themselves respecttively or their 
ly not malum in se , but malum pro-
punished in the same manner as an offence of the same 
Provisions which it would be necessary to insert for this
 : liation :  here his presence will hang heavy
is , supposing for argument sake they did err , what is it he ima-
the
distinguished
seeing it tells him what it is :  He then determines to keep 
question upon such and such contingencies .
Sharping or fraudulent obtainment is where
of people themselves . The most effectual as well as 
 ( b ) 
any Lawyer to consult of equal , not to say superior ,
 : periority in point of conventional domestic relationship . 4 . Im : 
15
New York ; 1802 :  Eddy ,
violated :  and that in respect of the faculty of leaving the
can conceive . The signification of the world  " rule "  is so loose
seized of the premises at and from the term of such decease then 
-blishment into which all such as thought proper 
particular Description  . #
a sufficient compensation ; he can never be made amends but 
But if at the same time it appear to him to be of
it be by doing her any personal injury . See the several sorts of
out more than one third of what , from the quantity of ground
Larceny
whether all the Truths in these Lectures are of that
 " presented petitions to the governor , in which they stated the various 
that the richest in the kingdom , & by a particu-
expressed in any eye than it does in mine . To mine , it is 
ib .
be strictly executed it will not put a stop to the obnoxious prac= 
 : terfeit . As if a man having possessed himself of a genuine
C
Guilt . # 
of which Offences of the first class  , that is Offences against indi :  
the pinnacle of penal luxury  _  total solitude .  _  
Offences against the National Interest in general .
3 
Aggravation III .
medicines in a secluded island or a town invested by an ene=
 : rally 
No compensation shall be given in case of Rape ; merely
 ' and by that means put an effectual stop to the impositions
very particular friend indeed , is it in the nature 
8
Among the Offences which can with propriety be placed 
 " following morning the settlers were called over , previous to which ,
 : or has of being able to pass off the money to some other per
3 . Nor if they were under illegal confinement at the time : 
indebted for the few items struck out of the catalogue of his
be observed is a case not for ordinary punishment but for 
 : cupations from which he was seduced by this dishonest 
the Appendix is unintelligible . 
against a man ' s Life . 
Punishment . 
 " away 
not be paid in respect of any further supernumeraries which may 
29
 : tended so to be . 
to them during their voyage to the place of 
uninstructive
less good in many others . And if Ministers why
make as if he were putting a period to the sacrifice . 
to take out Administration to , the personal Estate of such Survivor
is the letter that constituted or at least helped 
5 .
4 . Aiunt esse quilus testiculi sunt plures :  hoc casu pro reli=
materially
worth being made the subject of a Settlement . This must be
 " would destroy every white man there , and poised their spears in
no pretence of Title so to do . ||
of sports , is sharping .  ( a ) 
which of all these crimes then would a man committ in this realm
How these are respectively distinguished from
-ment ?  My good Lord !  The key of the door which opens to the
round to observe whether any person was in the way , you
to Simple Personal Injuries . Tit . V . Of Irreparable Personal
Note
of benevolence )  to punish offences committed by its own 
 : gainst in all civilized Nations by the regulations which place
 " in finding that government had a serious intention , as early
is to those whose principal concern is with guineas .
Exposition 
is will
 " its freeing the Mother Country from the depraved branches of her
of their work )  at a great expence . No idea has
to offer a personal Injury :  and in general the less atrocious an
to the Court of King ' s Bench on the first day of 
 : sible to ascertain the description of the Offence until the regula-
protection as to a native ; and unless in the particular 
17
 " an attempt had been made to burn the smaller boat , which
intrinsic ; that is whether it be valuable in itself , as 
object of the letters patent of the 20th July , 1766 , to use
work )  
of the said Act of the 7th of July 1794 the said Lords Commis-
 : fications ] 
-chief elsewhere :  are you a good man ?   _  we can ' t spare you . It 
practising amorous familiarities with a servant or other woman 
collected with great difficulty , have been kept in waiting
by a discourse or other documents personally addressed to him ,
44
Of Justifications .
having been carefully examined , it became necessary to make a small
ought every where to be adjusted by the legislator . Where this
-mages for Battery . 
motives he will find besides that in
many other advantages to the public , most of them
any great use . It is obvious that they can none of them have any ef=
this punishment it would be improper to keep on foot , after the exi=
utmost to prevent the mischief from run : 
fee accordingly 
The Verb  " to steal "  with it ' s Participle  " stealing "  
in conjunction , it may appear clearly that the mischief
upon this day of in the thirty fifth 
very
 : judicial to your own  . In what way ?  In any of the ways in
all events to the same degree of factitious legal infamy . 
Portland , at that time filling the high office Your
the repeal of a corresponding portion of another imperative law .  _  
My Lord , there are uses in fiction :  acknowledged uses :   _  
No wonder :  since in the bosom of the Governor there was this 
presumption of his intending to restore them :  besides 
found
 " conduct , and the latter , not only the 
is the same . The pleasure of surprize which the hearer or reader
observed
No commission issued  _  no Physicians , no nor so much as the
such a number at a time as he shall appoint .
species of Rose , if any thing can be said of the genus Rose that is of 
self against a disease of any kind before it appears .
 to and with the said Jeremy Bentham his heirs Executors & Admins
Secondly , the neglect  _  a neglect too indecorous
The detail of this would then , that mere change of time and place made no
ability , though devoted exclusively to the service , 
equivocal than another which I had under Consideration ;
ecuted that Power in Favor of John Miles :  my
question be not made the same ill use of . 
This is the case with every thing that is called Pleasure :  to exist it  _  
but at this time , no instructions whatever for the Governor , in any
two other Expirees also , but without permission :  as likewise
 " those who had their crops to secure , and to prevent the impositions
had suffered from a Theft . You will in fact
doing such or such a kind of work for such or such 
no precedent for New South Wales .
may furnish evidence of such force , as the positive testimony of
to have been made to such Survivor , for or on account of the
Had our Author consulted the history of other 
 : siderable degree of trouble , and take up a considerable de=
amount 
in a situation always besigged besieged by candidates : 
4
amount of the value of the use of it , or of the loss of it , for
the Bag , the Carriage standing still .
by which it is evident that it was want of permission on the
The burthen by being reduced as it were to impalpable parcels
Reasons
to number this among my  " flights "  :  this simple one possessing of
into the same predicament by any other circumstance .
than upon any person abroad  . There is no Coin of any Country , but 
temptation , it is true ; to the temptation of making a large 
foundation of Royal mercy is in your Lordship ' s hands .  _  Tell 
But the assaulter shall make compensation to the 
Reasons .
such premium or the payment of the said eventual head-
offenders of the highest rank , at all events , to such a degree 
Up Upon the principles I have thus ventured 
 " such harmless recreation nor from having of May
which upon the knowledge of the affair , the Judge shall order .
your Lordship to include the Peruvian Tales ?  The monster with
part of the governor , and not want of room or any other
14 .
a head upon his shoulders was not a more an object of more
of the different kinds of property established in the state .
Law - Sect concerning accidents by Fire . 6 . The Turpentine 
Of Rape .
a
being disposed of in this manner . If a man pawns the 
difficulties attending the making of an exact esti-
be spurious , must be false . In like manner may an instru=
by depriving him of one or other of these qualifications , the knowledge ;
 " apprized of the number of Convicts which the 
revived had accumulated to its greatest multitude 
and
similar to Mr . Bentham ' s . 
be permitted to take a part . The general nature of 
have an immense advantage over those who should remain under the
of their labour , and the same to retain  , subject only to the all-
any rate , whether he would or would not have 
Aggravation
by the said Architects would for the said number of 1000 have 
 : mities
-burne ' s frugality a Penitentiary House for a thousand
5 .
the cure of the mischief was either the sole object or 
C
their tyranny the multitudes who have been sacrificed to it .  _ 
 : easiness .
of the offence if the thing were wasted or destroy=
in a heavier degree as for Adultery .
C
The Reader will remember , we are considering here , 
On the negative side I find neither
to grant the relief they pra pray for . Little did they expect 
are intimately blended and connected . Work of 
4 . Where the Act prohibited is such as would produce 
Moreover in case of any dispute touching the amount of 
the beginning to occupy , the putting the spoon to his
-mined by two refeurees to be named one on the part 
first intended Governor and his said Successors shall on the 
Lordship will find the following charges , against the Duke
exercise ; and in a word that he was become totally irresponsible . 
evidence is not altogether without its weight . As to 
persons from the settlement :  two of them expirees , by permission : 
deter him from prosecuting .
therein mentioned fit so to be removed to such place of confine-
the Will of his Creator , unless he 
his Hulk Plan . 
4 . That at any rate on the part of his Under Secretary ,
occasional reward would make little of delivering up
taken place in respect of any other article or 
revoked it accordingly , the case would have been intelligible e-
when there were so few of these that is when it 
the former Case as in the latter . The Stock and Substance 
of
-position was  _   " Land with a fixed price to it has 
C
have stated elsewhere by what causes )  of whom again a
man , he not knowing her to be married , she shall be punished
18
 : ence , by the supposition , is not the fruit of his own 
systematical fraud and treachery and oppression  _  altogether
addressed to Parliament , and precluding on his part the 
to notice as aforesaid  :  the said allowance of 27,000 ,
This is enough to stand effectually in the way of any 
As the necessity may be more or less urgent , on 
of William Pitt . His successors , not daring to be innocent 
to give assistance to any other , if he can give it without any
which Mr Bentham has extracts .
 " such necessaries and comforts as they might require at a moderate 
be made to go there . Such aversion being a disposition that 
C
76
4 . Comm . p.231
Mr Bentham ' s Answer to a Paper intitled
which he knows to be contrived for making money on the edg=
I have frequent Occasion to recall
38
manner hereinafter mentioned , with the addition of such sup-
=fect on the reputation of any individual :  nor yet upon his condition ,
trust .  _  
for any accident of its failure , it is moreover agreed that in 
S d
not knowing but he is intitled to it ; for instance in the case of a suppo=
made or to have been made to such Survivor for or on 
P.27 - March 1797 .  " However unpleasant it was to the governor , that 
speak of ... . And must I then , my good Lord be made company for 
arise in the sort of treatment that it may be requisite to 
 : cies of industry is a kind of fund of responsibility of which 
75
let him do no more mischief than is necessary to answer his own 
 " the society , of those companions who had been the causes of their 
the Lords of His Majesty ' s Treasury and Jer : 
act of Theft is in some small degree deminished by the goods 
What can be more intelligible or explicit ? 
a Purse of a couple of hundred pounds  _  My
might be thought liable to err from ; or rules unerred from ?  rules that 
of which are worth a guinea ; but it contains 
Specification , or else with these explanatory 
Of Adultery .
expence of that superior expediency , which follows with or
C
much different and much tenderer sensation in his pro=
Mess : rs Blackburn and Hardwick Architects of the expence 
our Author very philosophically suppo-
p . 213 . Whatever construction is to be put upon it  [ the
be told how perilous a Thing it is to have an
 " in Cold Bath Fields "  . Ordered b to be printed 18 , Decr 1800 . pp 78 , 79 . 
-tentiary House or Houses , to continue in such office or offices re-
effectually against deception . The more however , a man 
a time  , it is called active or compulsive punishment :  
of it which was seen where the power was felt - in New South Wales : 
 " their last bushel for the gratification of the moment , thereby re-
not be enough to take from the Offender for the purpose
 : dulent obtainment has no such conjugate to answer
Reasons 
year 
stand
a
Sect . I . Law in General . 
Consent ; provided it be of all parties who
This statute , as any one may imagine , is not executed . 
 " possessed farms at the Hawkesbury , some of the settlers in that
to be absolutely irreplaceable :  particularly when it happens to be
 " The scarcity of wheat in the public store was occasioned 
To a gentleman , money alone is never to be deemed 
By the Slave Trade Act of the last Session , 
1
keeps his own Head above Water may drown those that
 : pose even this to happen You will in time be able 
or in general to make signs , at any rate to communicate ideas .
 Of Theft or Stealing .
Jeremy Bentham of Lincoln ' s Inn Esquire . 
6 .  _  Of taking journies which may occasionally become
they need , lest the poor should think themselves entitled 
given information of a mischief , the conclusion is 
becomes se necessary for me I fear to transcribe 
in general , or to the party in particular . 
-sessed of the said Stock and other personal Estate occupied with 
The price of fresh pork having been raised in consequence of the failure
 ( a )  A Lewis in France and a Catharine in Russia have given re=
C
And now it may be Time to observe , that
 ' of the world , and induce them to adopt such measures as 
directly on the Thing taken ,
thing itself . A bridge , a road , a ferry-boat , an aqueduct can
 [  ( a )  Measure ]  It matters not whether the measure be really a 
Wales would have become illegal almost as soon as it would
15 Oct 1802
kept to the time of trial , the Judge should be bound to 
expose himself to circumstances injurious to health :  or by
more advantages than it were to be wished it had over indi :  
lou from Fil , a thread :  fin comme un fil . As to the
named the one on the part of his Majesty by the said
uncommon for people even knowingly to accept them . When 
with this clause . She had sailed from England on the 8th of
speech , delivered in the House of Commons , on the 4th of Novr 1801 , on the
and prudence . To take the measures necessary for this purpose
a greater Degree :  Questions are started to what
 " of three . This alteration was to continue until the new crops
of capital punishment as above :  while in England 
test a piece of Silver Coin . 
contract or Contracts as therein and herein mentioned , or sooner 
Jeremy Bentham and his Successors shall at the end of
other  " what is that ?  "   " corroborate  _  aw  _  
-vided that they shall be made Creditors to the like amount in 
exactly what our author  ( I must say im-
add to the natural incitements which urge a man from all 
without being spurious . A discourse may be true , though
as he thinks proper into fine at the rate of not less than once , nor 
a case of theft since the deposing of the goods in this manner
8 years . Whatever be the thing needful join will to power 
 " rapports , qui derivent de la nature des choses . " 
house finds a bank note lying immediately under the 
 : ous as this be advantageous . When the Coingage is in a good state ; 
Semi-public Offences , or Offences against a class of persons may 
Other Aggravations are the same as 
Threat is accompanied with insult , a great part of the 
9 .
also by such Deputy or , if thereto ordered or required by the 
needs
 : ingly concerned in contracting for the purchasing or selling or 
of the land to make a profit by such articles :  or
 : gislator should on all occasions be careful to keep in view . But even 
America , for some time one envy same . Suppose
turned loose again to prey upon the community  _  upon a 
By a stranger in this case is meant any one who has
here , it would be dangerous to say :  especially if what I suspect 
2 . If he omits to take such measures as he has
 : vantageous to him . They are enough of themselves to furnish
matter artificial or natural .
to drive over a man . These acts are all of them such as in ge=
No 8 
But the first Loss must be born by somebody :  and it
-vor as well for the value of the said Buildings and other 
-coming , a man in whose instance there was no doubt but
insane or 1 . The Madman ' s Law :  2 . The Ideot ' s Law . 2 . The 
-ceptance of the original proposal , they stood engaged to give ;  _  
gratitude .  _  
 " They also beg leave to observe , that a very great 
 " weekly allowance of salt meat , eight pounds and a half of beef
eyes on which they will make the same impression 
should solemnly assert )  , as to make themselves proof against its effects . 
Now 
C
mark the Coin in a certain manner the more will the difficul :  
person . It is only in case of her having had a fortune , and
also be made in like manner without stint to every
11 .
manner and soon  :  and in short the more operations could be in=
It is a hard and not an uncommon case where in 
behalf of Government out of the value of 
 " and though he had not any doubt of their having sustained
 " the several Goals of the respective Counties can 
respect not of Gaols only but of instruments of all
in most cases it may not be necessary  , yet as there 
The fixed Stock , for instance , the building &c . must be kept up
under ten years old . 
8 . So in like manner a Surgeon .
In these cases the immediate object of the offence is the class
the less the expence of reformation , the less it will 
1 .
principles  _  one of them alone consistent with justice and ulti-
If the insolvent is a Trader , his treatment is very dif= 
-ducing their families to distress and nakedness .
In the Hulks under Mr Campbel ' s care the
exception , worse corrupted than before :  and , where the
any other kind of imposition . With a certain degree of pre=
 : nues in the dominions of one ' s own state , and as such 
may be either such as affect any individual members of 
gunpowder not properly secured  ; and you , being at a dis : 
15 9 . 3 . Rep . by Cowper  _  pp . 206 &  _ 
I am told
How proper soever it may be in sep respect of the
or a mine .
34
of a thing with some given rule . Our Author 
far as they go the received Doctrines of the Law .
to be suspicious ; and such washings if within Six Months no 
difference .
and without discount not only at its birth but through every stage
there is wanting is it , being discovered where they are 
what he has taken .
Costs shall be distributed at the discretion of the Judge .
qua ex delict :  
misbehaviour the quantity of such meat or succe-
Of Injuries to the Liberty of Loco-Motion
Of Simple Personal Injuries .
Art.22 . And Whereas by a Report made to the Honour-
 : dicial authority is not dependent on the magistracy 
C
8 . As to Blight or the deleterious influence which the atmosphere is apt to 
drowned in the bad effects of the surrounding bad 
Note .
the subject , but by understanding
special measures are taken by any Law for the express purpose of guar=
-pointed sole Feoffee for the purpose of purchasing the same 
he will have the pleasure of possessing the
been
by inspecting it at a distance . _ 
shall humbly recommend to his Majesty that he would be 
possession of the whole Establishment and so occupy or dispose 
Administrator or Administrators of , or person or persons intitled 
such
Mr Nepean has been made or is intended to be made. .
1
of privation you will suffer at the thoughts 
has
an aversion to working , it is very fit that he should 
 " their misfortunes , yet his duty to government compelled him 
or member ; and provided the party do his ut=
information in no small degree interesting may now be 
If the Jurisdiction by the authority of which a man 
bankrupt to him , as Parliament has been made 
 : man is held motionless either by force or terror :  where through
fourth year of his present Majesty ' s reign intitled An Act 
Imprisonment , and , for the second Offence , Death . 
Just so much the Reader sees , as to this part of it , in 
 ( a )  In England with respect to the counterfeiting of the copper coin 
is 
a-
and fraudulent taking away and carrying away
than if it had obtained gratis an annuity to the
that which our Author calls Municipal , the Law that a part of 
of any relation or relations of the Wife ' s .
2
Direct
Penitentiary House upon the said Panopticon plan , of pro-
attempted to get away were stopped yet it does not 
-nistrators doth convenant promise and agree to and with the 
 [  ( B )  Concerned ]  See Tit :  of Associates in Delinquency . 
need no separate procedure . It would appear upon the face 
 " &c &c "  
manners , and Customs , of different ages , 
to  " the Masters of the Transports "  :  and these men , instead of 
-nest and sufficient livelyhood at all times after the expiration of 
In this place , truth compells me to ac-
SECT . 1 . Law in General  ( 1
It
 : sons
injury to these great officers at no higher a price than 
Sovereign power and obedience thereunto . See 
necessary not only that work shall be done , but 
 " him for his conduilt conduct , he had been known to walk
to try him . A man will think himself pretty secure , and in gene= 
what is said of Law here , is said of Law general without res-
 : jured is a privileged member of a state in amity . For 
doing Justice , it can only be  ( as we shall see more particularly hereafter ) 
object . As to the ignominious punishment , the use of
sentence , till an opportunity may offer for their being trans-
2 . He may be fined
Where  [ ten ]  persons lose their lives in con=
C
requisite to treat it upon a higher footing . 
6 . Compulsion . 7 . Deference to Authority  ( a )  . 8 . Provocation , to
the dissolution of the marriage in this case must be determined
act and turning it into a principal Offence . But in a bad state of 
we have seen how .
authority it has the same reason nearly for affording 
- " tering every possible relief , by supplying the inhabitants with 
-ty within the Bills of Mortality 
4 :  But the most forcible objection of all seems to be
Point of Law , the Question being merely whether that
however is the ease here .
Now therefore it is hereby declared and agreed that upon the 
Order which I shall pursue 
interests of reformation and those of economy 
or Houses when erected , with their appurtenances during his 
affront even from one of his own rank than it is to a gentleman
For
in regard to wholesome food , Mr Bentham will
be established before hand that they whose Fate is
4 .
which
circumstances ; as if the thing taken be a Bank Note  ; and he who 
proved from any other motive than that of avoiding the trouble 
30
whose custody or possession it was to know who
 : ally not of a value worth regarding . He may 
7 . Tempest is provided against in the way of administration , by the 
occasioned he shall on the first offence be excused from 
1 . He may be reprimanded and his name registered in the
more numerous than the latter . To each different lot of pu= 
Penal Colony .
salutary power which tends to restrain men from actions per : 
high office  _  was pleased , in conversation with a common friend ,
-ding competent to their situation , and in a state 
C
perfectly agreed ; and which indeed are too clear to be 
purpose he does not very well see how , in justice 
Of Theft or Stealing . 
 [  ( F ) Knowing ]  Whatever value the thing actually
-owances to be made to such prisoners in manner herein 
be properly a Law . It is requisite that this resolution be no-
Take it before or after the Explanation 
themselves are but as means to an end  _  I mean 
 : sistence , which he would have got without working had he escaped de=
1
out 
3 . Indemnification to be provided at the expence of the Crown 
as from the several Kinds of Frauds .
in question  , and the amount of the enhancement upon each such 
-remy and the said Samuel Bentham if there shall be any 
he will be glad to go there , and get it :  if it be from 
Next as to what may be done with a man in 
by mMost Noble and Right Honourable persons , 
it is not designed to apply it but in case of a second or
 " His Majesty ' s Justices of the Peace for the County of 
will hardly expect he should have a greater . 
than five for every day ' s confinement . The stripes to be inflicted 
As if a Promisory note of a considerable sum should by
how long )  after the determination had been taken 
 : stance , and no particular damage can be proved to have happened ,
 ' His Excellency , from an earnest desire to promote the prosperity 
have commenced , were liberated at the indication of a person very
fire .
of taking pleasure .
due satisfaction shall have been made to the estate of 
 : traordinary accident is never to be had but from the testi=
Principal Office must of course furnish at least
C
A thing may be supposed to appeared to a man to
That recommendation by subordinates should
know of it are not necessarily alarmed at it ; but all people 
upon the travellers calling for tea , this according to the
 ( A )  Justifications are I
C
laws of the land .
in the same ship at the same time . As far as can be judged ,
-ance . Even upon the face of the law , the duty is 
more severe 
to their labour .
states makes no difference ; for howsoever the happiness of a na= 
expressing Contempt for a man :  and they are liable to be ex=
derived by these same Magistrates . In May 1798 they 
or private trust .
intricate , nor therefore the Doctrine relative to it more
11 P 204 . April 1799 .  " It having been for several days reported , that
Of Frauds relative to the Coin .
any further expence to Government . 
The information may be conveyed either 1 . By oral
realized . The Bel ona , arrived 15th January 1793 came provided
Of Culpable Insolvency .
3 . The Profit is just the same :  for the gain of half a 
church ,  ( or whatever it be )  is kept in repair :  so much as regards the
 +  If this Mode of Expression should be thought too
 ( a )  If any Legislator should think proper to pursue this idea and 
worth regarding , if it be such a sort of thing as it is to be presum : 
 [ 8 and 9 Will . 3 . C . ' 26 S . 6 and 9 ]  took upon him to prohibit un= 
Sect.1 .
 : gainst a member of the state , are requisite to provide as 
The Fees for offices and all services incident to these offices 
And whereas in and by the said last mentioned Act power 
To be copied
-ing after fixing upon a certain piece of Ground therein described 
Question which have for their motive the same Thirst 
sufficient importance to merit a place here . 
derstanding our Author , and understanding the subject were the  _  
be made before the acts which it prohibits can be seen clearly
the work being
of the Land Tax i : e :  the exchange of so many portions 
Extenuation
before it made its escape out of the press !  No human
months deliberation and conference , an authority for making 
name of the summons or order . 
these titles could such provisions be exhibited in terminis , 
Art . 18 . The life of each prisoner is to be insured by 
mentioned , being intended to include all the charges attending 
If
away and so forth is punished with the
by Government for what purpose , requiring only 
in the present chapter will be found equally to belong to all :  and so
to have appeared to him not of a value to be worth
pursue it , & pursue it with full effect , have 
said Jeremy Bentham for himself his Heirs , Executors & 
be not amiss to subjoin yet another Aphorism to
the consent of our said councils , and the representatives of
 " others , his neighbors . These unoffending lads they selected as the 
 : turally be but ill relished by the latter . 
consequential damage will commonly fall principally to the share
4
was an act of heedlessness . But this will not appear to
12 .
on the part of the Court or Officer of the Crown , but by leave 
and the secondary mischief would be in the same proportion ; as 
22
 : ther 1 . Parties , or 2 . Witnesses :  that is persons at large to whose 
must principally turn . _ 
Of Family Imposture .
 <gap/>  <gap/>  <gap/>  <gap/>  <gap/> 
to a piece of coin is designed to answer the purpose of a dis=
 " hands ; it was , therefore , certainly very essential to the comfort 
 : certained before the coercion is applied . All other 
Question , to have been taken , must have been so
kind committed against a native . While the foreigner conti= 
a man
powerful .
Value of a Bank Note . In particular circumstances it may ap : 
two for this one office . The place being to be made 
of judging which his malevolence suggests to him
last mentioned Act power is given to his Majesty to direct
of the said Establishement would be in great measure
Bills of Mortality , and the calculations thereon 
been ever entertained of making Mr Bentham
it . In point of signification the term filouterie in
so much Poor-rate . It was but t ' other day as Your
 : son . In other words it is only in as far as he is understood 
period , the said intended Governor and his said Successors 
 : tione et emissione . 
 [  ( C )  Hindering ]  1 . It matters not by what means :  whether by 
 [  ( a )  Rank ]  What shall be deemed a disproportion in point of rank
who will come on the carpet presently :  - it will
shape of some one or other of the offences against the pro :  
-jesty , His Heirs and Successors from time to time by an order 
Another thing is that people at large fail not to take
the more a man would suffer by any loss  , the less like=
Stock , &c upon the premises , notwithstanding 
which is always present somewhere or other and always ad=
intention were direct or indirect . See Tit :  Of In : 
3 . Where at any time before prosecution the offender makes
sought
Article.7 . Each Prisoner shall be supplied every
Parliament for doing all this  _  an establishment which in 
as not to be occasionally the seats of pestilence ) 
 [  ( A )  Lawful cause ]  See Justifications infra .
concerned with Coiners , would every convict him on such a Law ; nor 
order matters that whosoever stands in need of employ 
Offences 
 " plundering them of their property , and endangering their personal 
If a thing be such as may reasonable be supposed 
The state in question by the supposition possesses an exterior amity .
Improvements and Stock to be settled by two referees , one to be 
the following proposal for maintaining and employ-
1
question without a licence :  nor should any man who was al= 
during the continuance of the marriage by and Adulterer , as if it
Law , 
 : er of promulgating temporary laws against acts prejudicial 
is done to walls or woods or other barriers which have been establish=
his
Art . 19 . To secure to each Prisoner being able to 
quantity of stock it would be necessary to trust him with 
and registered ; as also
been less sincere in such their profession , than the Duke 
certainly far enough from being a necessary one , that 
chance we hear something like them from 
set of regulations coincide therefore undistinguishably with
Among these conditions I do not observe that of being dependent
Such being the knot , what course can be taken , for
 " four thousand pounds in any way more beineficial 
9
expedients of all kinds which it may be requisite to em= 
C
and beautiful , if any one offers in payment any of the old and counter=
merit and guilt confounded and if possible rendered
which had taken place , or , when they were , might be long incapable either 
calculating the confusion and distress that may be brought
-fortunate drought during ten months , the wheat did not turn
the deluded Woman , or her fortune . It is a compound as it were
-pose by the King ' s Majesty his Heirs or Successors , which Feoffee 
burnt to death ; having endured the Tor :  
Wife , by addingto her separate allowance , if she has any ,
furnishing , especially the apartments of the Officers , 
 : ner a separate offence .
law
also with India Bonds , Bank Notes , Banker ' s Promissory 
hours , provided that all due diligence be employed in office hours
 " worse regulation than the New Prison ... . The arrange-
Fifthly 
a foreign State . 
Extracts from the case of Hall v Campbell
as a piece of paper it might be of value sufficient to induce-
be estimated at . 
 " as receptacles for such transportable convicts as 
depends
 [  ( C ) Fire ]  It matters not in what place ; whe : 
Reasons .
6
instrument , instead of a fixed Book .  _  Taken from Exche-
man feels at knowing of another who has lost to the value 
with 
particular
for the good of the state it is expedient he should be sub-
Coin . 
N . S . Wales
effect , so in the moral world , we 
thousand Prisoners for one year )  is not by any means a suffi-
the Offender ' s punishment may be as follows 
morals without adding to County rates would have made his appear-
injurious . It is the more public the greater the number is of 
basely imputed to the contracting party  _  as a ground for im-
have
for the 2d . The reason of  ( Giving )  the latitude that is
the counterfeit Coin , the mischief is as effectually incurred and 
of  ' stock ; and assures them that he has taken such steps 
 [  ( b )  Renewed ]  Upon every fresh coinage the government , it is true ,
 ( D ) 
Extenuation Excuse V .
man who shall be employed in work , and who
Because the only name they are known by belongs to all
 " Henry Hacking , a person on whom he could depend . Upon his
Of Theft or Stealing
or required by the Court in person , then and there  , as well as on any 
day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred 
 : curity by these means in one way he loses in another . 
shall remain and continue in such legal representatives or persons
proposed paper .
to find fit persons to deal with will be so much time taken 
obtained a thing makes amends for the damage he has 
 ( A )   ( B ) 
For it is but a declaration of the sense that all mankind who care 
1
or to be made up by and out of the private fortune , or save by 
 : bly be considered as responsible for the conduct of that per= 
are
 " not be disturbed letted or discouraged from any lawful
Of Unlawful Confinement .
It may now also be Time to take a short
or otherwise damnified ,
the amount of the enhancement upon each :  such account 
less than it costs Government to maintain them 
knowingly convey or be concerned in conveying out of the 
inhabitants as had been designed for it by that Act . 
a married man her punishment may be as follows .
what the only documents then public shewed it
England
 : ing to the different values of money in different countries . The rule might 
but a blow from a servant to a gentleman dishonours the
stitutes 
prejudice
C
to , and a violation of the first , and is therefore void . 
upon as a presumption of his possessing some honest Art from 
any
first day of every term by themselves respectively or their 
expect to find it within the compass of human 
by
death for this offence would succeed as well in England
the Crime in Question as well from Embezzlement
said Statute vested in some Feoffee appointed for that purpose
 : ever idleness and whatever indigence there may be , is 
improvement that has no particular reference to 
-cessors , under such powers directions limitations and restrictions as 
fixed upon accordingly and the said Jeremy Bentham ap-
paper containing a promise to deliver to any one so 
this Article of force , the Governor should 
have 
it to be counterfeit , it will be impossible to prove as much by 
 " then , as he was unacquainted with the nature of them , he was
 : gation .
=pon the person or property of that party by his relation to whom
own Laws especially to take a different factitious one
the 
Bentham which formed the basis of the present agreement , and 
to make a sacrifice of it to the security of the Coinage and to 
 ( A ) 
easy it will be to intercept such criminals in their unlaw=
hi  " its infancy "  therefore it was that he received what is 
Criminal Devastation :  which See . 
 : son therefore a punishment greater than even that for Rob=
 ' the calculations thereon grounded by the late Rev : d Dr Price . 
Two Years Imprisonment ; and for the Third , Death . 
the party who is said to know it is persuaded of its being so , 
And all such allowances as under the terms of this agreement 
Characteristic   ( A ) 
that of
contiguous or near adjacent :  as if it be in
 : ty be encreased . 
according to the finding in this special verdict is paid
I have taken no small pains to find an
 : stances of the Offender . 
Perditis
Disenssions ; and to leave it to the Jury in every
Coin is of course examined with much more attention than a 
species of fraud . This Fraud may have two Objects ; the person of
intention ,
person , it is evident enough that on various occasions 
mischief in this way , or  " yesterday "  they will say to themselves , 
he might be induced to favour . Into the jaws of this Bastile
10 . Each prisoner shall be allowed a share of his earnings 
Justiciabilis venias  , mutatis mutandis  , as before . 
between nations a state of apparent amity is oftentimes a state of 
-cession of unknown Governors , the instruments of an arbitrary
brought to light at all . But the fact of a suppositio partus 
-point an umpire .
as aforesaid , untill due satisfaction shall have been made to the
offences in any body of Laws in force is made as light as 
save in the article of live stock , a resource on which it could not
the actual price and expenditure at the said later 
and vague that it is still more difficult to fix the import of it
 " punishment , a much less number of offenders escape conviction .
in the world , either collectively or individually . Their oppressions & cruelties excite
Other Aggravations are 1 . Seniority of the party injured . 
the same Place . But , surely , in these en-
individuals . But nothing can more easily happen than that all the
to Mr Bentham ' s treaty , nor was any notice
even the number of them whose right of departure had 
the 
reformation , or rather non _ increase ofor corruption , 
victims at a rate at which by this time they would
precaution , so as he does but think it worth his while , 
which the matter is regarded on both sides , on account of the 
that what appears now to him as a hardship 
of the said number of Convicts , three weeks notice 
as it continues calling upon yYour Lordship nor for ob-
3 . So where any other Person does the same thing whether the pre=
sum 
17
the debasement . 2 . The expence of the Operation .
who had a right to depart giving the liberty of 
as for double Adultery .
=son . This holds good in a less degree with regard to the silver
unintelligible to a man of common
4 .
debility I mean the relaxation that pervades the 
50
and Composition of the few Phrases into which
4 . Ravages of noxious Animals .
jealousy
reduction of the ration in time , in order to prevent a greater .
not legal fiction  _  in an argument on a question of law !   _  
of it without Hesitation for the Reasons mentioned
Military power and obedience thereunto .
them to contribute by their own money to the improvement 
word . Besides that Sharping has the conjugate Sharp=
cloathes take fire ; and You instead of endeavouring to put it 
of any fact , which , according to the usages that
they may do exactly as they please . On these obscure 
the mere influence of the Law , abstracted from 
to the king . 
C
Seal unbroken , the Judge appealed from shall be answerable
be when delivered altogether in a plain stile . Moreover
more particular set or sets of Officers appointed for this pur=
Remainder 
6 .
shall be exhibited at one or more times for the space of not
same , become in effect so much the less and proportionably insufficient 
not set aside by other specific considerations . I mean 
those of disobedience punished . But the propor-
be sensible
 " to the very man whose greater opulence enabled him to
the internal tranquillity of the state when committed a=
6 . It must be depretiation proof :   _  being current on the above footing
Sometimes indeed Insolvents are discharged ; but this is 
under the powers of the said Act might if some provision were
must have seen him ; it will appear that your striking him
 +  4th . Inst . 107 .
14th of October 1799 :  Signature that of the Duke of 
all those Inlets to Impunity under equal guilt , which
thing is to know the fact of its being taken . As if a man going
According to this alteration the words to be
as follows .
is impregnated . It was not enough to stretch into a perpetual
&214
IV .
Note .
5 . Also 
or untill his Majesty shall direct the return of such offender 
will have such large Sums by him in either of those metals , as 
2 .
with that of Cheating by false Weights and Measures :  with this 
some one person in the former case , and that does equally 
in producing bodily pain or uneasiness by selling unwholesome
for punishing exists not before the law is made . The law must
1 . The mischief in the two Cases is either just
 " And for maize , do .  _   _   _  4 ditto .
Calamity of a Fire . 
to do towards defeating the attempt by struggling or calling for 
 " person in Law "   +   " that whatever personal property
definition of law :  he had said ,  " les loix sont les
all questions which arise there . Whoever purchases , lives ,
an assembly should be called .  <gap/> 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
In this respect , this offence stands upon nearly the footing 
possible of the acts which may be necessary to be performed 
2 . Whether it were the intention of the offender
Coin its distinctive properties and the more unlike those ope= 
 : fender may be obliged to marry her . Qu .
 " in the month of October . "   _  
the plan of separation . What matters it whether 
For this purpose the Age of the parties is also to be
This being the case it will be allow ' d that he has not 
For insulting Threats the Punishment shall be 
59 ) 
and other unworthy means . As to the affections of the peo :  
 : ny .   ( a ) 
lawful cause is concerned in hindering the Guardian or the Ward
Observations
is likely to suffer more or less in his good opinion from 
of
yet , I believe , been directly signified .
Mr Ford assumes , as it was very natural for him 
by 
concerned in it , for ever unfit for the exercise of any public 
in the second case it means neither more nor less than a com-
Bentham or his said Successors , on the conviction of such 
might contribute to the subjecting an Individual to a burthen
 : ports to belong . but this is not necessarily the case . The loss 
 ( a )  In England so little difficulty is made about the Copper Coin ; 
it be a house in a town all persons who
may be brought to light at any distance of time by the treach=
in any book of universal Law :  since they will need to be 
for example  ,
Offences against the external Security of the State .
-ament , to wit by an Act of the 20th of March 1794 Ch.15 as also 
Governors , to receive to themselves the whole produce and profit 
review of the Definitions given by expository Writers , 
and such chastisement shall not justify the servant for
the way of a man labouring under a suppression of urine .  +  
although it should appear to have been once occupied a
15
whose
crown , upon a Guinea is neither more nor less than that of half
and
any of them would be to enter upon a branch of Law fo : 
and they are hereby determined to be subject to the
3 . Against Foreign Enemies in contempt of a Pass-port on 
season , and the method observed by Captain Cook was practised at Norfolk Island ,
14 _ th To make himself personally responsible for 
 : ticular nature of the act which , however mischievous it 
=es of an inferior rank . Under the former division I comprehend
 : dulent occupation in question without such a kind of ingenuity 
evil lessened :  but , in the present state of things , the labour
 : ther , for a time or forever :  so also may he from the presence
43
House or Houses shall be erected in pursuance of , and according to , 
unless the party deserted should have made another choice .
warning before their eyes , nobody , one may be sure , would 
either negatively by not giving what is true ; or positively , 
 " it can only now be done , by the assembly of the island ,
year . 
such that calls for our Review . 
continue in such office or offices respectively , for such time & 
during which interval a great deal of consequential damage may
to entertain a particular assurance of such extraordi=
C
Note .
 : ment for the past . 
if in consequence of the defamation a mob rises and ill treats the per=
 ' Forfeitures , as in and by the said several Laws in declared
-tial allowance towards the same the bulk of the expenditure ne-
less
fixed term of a quarter of a year the Judge may also convert as much 
A tumultuous Assembly is where a number 
c 
10 . Explosion .
a crown upon a louis-dor  . 
-coming . During all this time the benefit of General
it
This , as far as depends upon the Choice of 
sum total of
-rally present himself as standing first upon the 
-nied with a comparative statement of the prices at the two periods 
should have the means of making their sentiments known 
motive to induce him to commit the offence and produce 
his delivering it )  proceeded on the supposition
of their own accord ,
3 
upon the degree of currency which the foreign Coin in ques=
2 . But non-resistance is no consent if the party were stu-
 : ferent . If a certain number of persons who are Creditors to a 
such a cause . 
non vobis  , and surely rather an extraordinary one . 
work )  engage such Prisoner as an hired Servant by the year 
1 . Provisions against preliminary offences ; or Provisions 
 " governor consented to receive the wheat only at the former price of ten
that the comparative appearance of the parties in point of strength
C
Mr . Ford ' s Observations upon a Contract between the 
 : thority from the public mint , shall be punished as for coining :  
in detail the whole state  , moral and medical of the establishment :  
evil fame for chastity . In such case he shall only
legislation proved by the Gra-
the Value of the thing stolen .  +  
party assaulted and receive that or more from the neigh : 
C
 " & security of the settlers in particular , that they should live 
finding what he wants . Years ago he would restrain vice & improve 
-venience that might result from the addition such a provision
 " was then driven by his necessities to dispose of his grain 
The British Constitution conquered 
graciously pleased to appoint the said Jeremy Bentham 
Introductory Observations .
Office , and directed either to the Governor , or to the Judge Advocate _  
justification for the cutting off a man ' s finger , this would
 ( a ) 
 [  +  ] 
which this illicit practise is only an occasional deviation , and 
2 . Those of a military officer over persons at large in a time
Penalty is not ordinarily inflicted . 
 : ment which is thence apt to be entertained that con=
 ( a ) 
such remainders as are also hereinafter mentioned , shall , 
Sect . I . Law in General .
or his said Successors , on the conviction of such Felon , a sum of 
was to endanger human life if the offender
Plymouth out of about 700 there died in one year
-on a proper spot of ground upon which shall be 
 " 1800 . 
partly upon the reason that one ' s own state may have for 
time return . A button maker or silversmith who has taken 
of base Coin , the obtaining things of a certain Value in return
April 20th 1801 _  
10 .
1
 : ance . When a man is considered as being subject to any 
6 . If any person have knowingly in his possession or be know=
 : ing to circumstances of the parties , at the discretion of the Judge .
over the table of offences claped according to their
barbarous in the degree , will be among the account which Your
patriots like ourselves were to help  " crowd "  the streets
Author of the Commentaries  _   " the felonious
1/3 of which allowance of 1 a day may be retained by such 
execution of the same :  but in case of idleness or
and so from time to time be at liberty to deliver in an 
or unfortunately the favourite ma maxim about 
 : cording to the nature of operations which are necessarily
In these three cases the afflictive punishment shall not take
them  _  confusion and inconsistency  _  Will not allow Panopticon any Convicts 
was by this last horn of the syllogism , that Bloodsworth was 
5 . An Instrument may be spurious without being coun=
thing of the same sort bona fide or under colour 
The author , having turned his thoughts to the 
-sed by the reception of such latter supernumerary  :  as for example , 
in many respects , treated as if it were so . But with as much
What an officer takes in virtue or by colour of his office
performed either in the way of execution that is at the con=
may in that case be very proper to employ punishment to deter 
Sect . I Law in General 
whereof fifty by permission , fifty more without it . + 
taken kept or destroyed by a man secretly if  ( he in particu=
Exposition
1 . for prevention of famine .  _ 
Note .
22 .
6 . From Storms . See the Seafaring-man ' s Law Sect . Con-
 " at Botany Bay . Could the evidence of some of these people have 
others in similar situations are called upon to receive 
Jeremy Benthamm of Lincoln ' s Inn Esquire , of the other part . 
the abuse itself till it is ripe  _  ripe on the verge
other day or days on summons from the Court or in Vacation time 
42
of 
 " additional expence has been incurred , on account of Pri-
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
Rape is where a man has carnal knowledge of a person not
 " already proved a great check upon criminality "  .
 [  ( E )  Worth regarding ]  The value of a thing may be deemed not
payable on the reception of the Prisoners to re-
 " to the House of Commons relative to his Majesty ' s Prison 
-mainder to any Assignee or Assignees of the said Samuel 
 " received into the public store "   _ 
Of Frauds relative to the Coin .
the above facts to be established . But for this 
It can answer therefore no purpose to make the pu=
rather substitute this in the Room ofit Definitiones
the semblance of a remedy was to be applied . The
Majesty shall by order directed to such Overseer appoint Now 
 : son of the same profession or trade as are calculated to give him an
Extenuation
The only paper put into my hands by my Brother was , 
Answer to this Question , and the Results is that I
of being deprived of the thing in question . 
but one no ways relevant to the Purpose of
Remainder 
-raging the Trade of his Majesty ' s British Subjects in America ,
the whole
-dable difference between estimated and actual expence  , could 
C
reason to think requisite in order for a person in 
 " burthened in a great variety of ways , would be found ina-
The station of Jailor is not in common account 
13
6 .
-ed Governors :  to wit a sum equal in amount to the damage 
5 . Where the Act prohibited is such as would produce 
& complaints
persons or destroys the property of particular individuals among the 
ever signed by any other person than he who name it is that is
such improvements , that the penitentiary system 
 " injury of others , and the petty farmers in general .
cause the said Officer to assay the piece before he gives in his
once in every fortnight .
ab initio . Any pretended conveyance would be void of course ; 
 " would be severely felt should he quit it "   ( the Colony )  "  while in 
for him , meant nothing less than to offend times
But  " dictated "  is the word he uses in the next page after that 
goes along with it , as a man in irresponsible circumstances 
or upon appeal of the party , the Judge , the party accused 
instrumental in producing ; he is not even sure that he shall 
not be the case in the other .
Letter 3d 
to put it in practice if ever the Security of the State 
of price shall within the same period have 
enough , certainly not illegal ; and so far without
will have nothing either to receive or to pay :  if , instead of 
7 . From the Plague and other infectious diseases . See Laws 
C
workman whose dealings are confined to the produce of his 
-date . I have examined  the Acts of the 19th and 34th of his
or how it , or how it can serve to distinguish Law from any thing
3
Decision will stand as an Evidence of the Imperfection
 : tice of the more atrocious offence  :  instead of driving him on to Rob=
C
 : tions , Safe-conducts and Flags of truce . 
 " After then , the women and children were mustered , and
Office it belongs to make these signatures is prevented at any time
the
It is for the intelligent Reader to decide whether
 : en  :  whether of persons who was in danger of being sufferers or even 
of the said number of Convicts , three weeks notice at the least 
-ience of exposing his management to a 
should become inhabitants , or who had , or should regain 
given in the preceding one of August 1792 was compleatly
But in either Case , the Thing in
to a person so related to You , as by an injury done to 
* Here the worthy Magistrate is quite mistaken .  " I can
country all at once  _ 
under the head of treason 
appear that any more were flogged for it . But if 
Notes ; and private Promissory Notes and Bills of Exchange . 
any where else will a man take any Gold coin which he sus=
 : curing something that is of intrinsic value  :  as the 
think :  and the moment they did begin to think , their
to those Anomalities . 
naturally present itself in that view , supposing him 
attention than a piece of Copper Coin . In England especially since 
 _  a Member of the legislature and not an idle one  _  
Secuirty it is spurious :  counterfeit however it is not :  because
1802 .
Persons who  ( one might almost venture to affirm )  
3 . Where the Act prohibited is such as would not 
of local distance - had been trusted to - nature herself having 
-iary House or Houses shall be erected in pursuance of , 
Of Simple Mercantile Defraudment
two cases with respect to the demand for punishment ?  
known , lays hold of any article and without
reduce his service .
Panopticon 
inevitably  &  in all things obey 
In 
 : tection .
however does not perfectly and necessarily upon a par with
No . 3 .
for the Purpose of characterizing the Offence 
When once it is admitted that Violence may
67
Methods the most simple , is that with which we will begin .
Art . 19 . To secure to each Prisoner being able to work an ho-
who had pulled off the Skin or the Wool from a
said Jeremy Bentham shall be entitled to the total 
19 20
reign the thirty fourth intitled an Act for erecting a 
2
-nifesting the sincerity of the assurance , and the manifestation is
cloathing furnished by him to the said Prisoner , untill the 
 " to time attended the exertions of the industrious in agriculture , 
 : ther are of small concern . 
 : liation of those hostilities on one ' s own state .
grounded
had been fostered :   _  or the contrary  _ 
Truth ?  And did this learned Lawyer want to
hand of the Governor with liberty to let loose any person whom
 ( a ) 
=ply in but a small proportion of the cases in which there
Of criminal Inundation .
=cial damage he may be punished civilly as well as criminally
Reason
that there are four hundred :  but so much however
in its power ; or in other cases acquiesces at least in his be :  
 : fications ] 
Law is forgotten :  after which it acts not as a remedy but only as a
which by the terms of the implied agreement
The Definition I am about to give , indicative of 
 +  v . the Chapter of Nomenclature
does it give me when my Money ' s gone to be
-mediate misconduct the mischief had been brought
was  , that , as Government had paid that sum once 
the 17 of March which was in the year of our Lord 
English Lawyers would have been Theft . too !  It is
without leave on the 5th Day , in the Intention
Art 20 . To bind the attention of the said Jeremy Bentham 
18
28
Aphorisms for their Direction
There your presence would hang heavy on him .
voluminousness
C 
22
damnified by such felony encreasing according to the 
said intended Managers the encouragement necessary to induce 
Instructions to the Judge .
and which he knows to be contrived for cutting , by force of a 
in disgrace and solitude be accepted as a sufficient punish-
  <gap/>   
there is often as much knowledge in this case as there can be 
 : ings . 
have lost a thing by a theft , you will still
community from which they had so justly and so necessarily 
and it was this no-meaning
under the eye of Justice , it is hereby also agreed that the said 
 : tentions .
P . 268 . October 1799 .  " The scarcity of wheat at this time 
in order to be able to surmount in all cases
Art.20 To bind the attention of the said Jeremy Bentham 
either false money in payment :  or at the time of such tendering have 
Upon the whole it ought to be so ordered , that the Wife 
perceptible to our selves . It 
state furnishes military stores to the enemies or revolted sub= 
 " buck shots in his head and different parts of his body , was taken 
be from those of the other  . If the penalties were also 
-der such conditions as his Majesty shall direct , who being 
taking and carrying away the personal Goods
it . As a handful of blackberries or hedge-nuts in
foreign Coin is counterfeited or diminished as where a like inju= 
-ence :  - duty has been spoken of  _  now comes perform-
to such purpose shall have been granted by the Court before 
place of confinement or be removed to and confined in any other 
7 .
Extortion in an officer is where a person in office being 
 : ber 
and Penitentiary Houses upon do are so identical 
called his freedom  _  viz :  an obligation to work for two years , 
2 . for prevention of drunkenness .
agreement made concerning it , as a piece of gold or silver ; or con : 
these cases it may not be of altogether equal importance
paid in manner hereinafter mentioned , with the addition of 
taken , and who he is .
would be discoverable by tests so obvious as not to require 
and Divine Service in reading writing & arith-
-quate to each man ' s desires . ]  
of being under the care of a person whom the Law has judged to be
notice at the least having been given of such readiness on 
misfortune .
Adulterer nor the supposed Adulteress should be compellable 
cited relative to propositions , in which both sides seem to be 
to 
 " extremely ill to the hospital . This man was first known in the 
done by the Offence . 
compulsion :  And accordingly as the Offender will have it in 
Note
or piece of Paper above-mentioned .
 : ployed is to be treated upon the same foot=
C
Of Frauds relative to the Coin . 
 [ 16 ]   [ Local Annuity Note Office in ... . ]  The mode of exhibiting
than what used to take place under the do transportation 
C
that may be expected to take place among the pri-
 : duce quarrels when delivered before a man ' s face than
 " disappeared , and no more was seen seen of them , leaving Hacking
-posed in regard to other points , and could have very
more seriously felt , as at one time a hope was entertained of
=most 
thing , in some distant Century , to the object of Reformation ?   _  
in the mind of him who uses them ; that meaning should be such
To appease that resentment  , an obvious expedient 
 : mon stock , and the wife little or nothing , some allow=
superiority of intuition which is among the appendages of such
11.th To pay a sum of money for every one who dies 
 " the hands of a body of a irritated and hostile natives , 
such office or offices respectively  , for such time and un-
-ount of which reduction shall be deducted from 
placed every man in such circum- 
p 209 . The 6th , and last proposition is , that if the kings ,
in this figured stile it is more apt to be consigned to verse .
 : cit manner . This is done by annexing the favour rather 
out  , sit still and look at him . 
each other will be seen in its proper place .
after mentioned . 
marketable price . On the other hand the profit 
to
 : cible invasion of his dwelling , land or goods , or verbal a=
Where the wife brought a capital into the common
be made to pay more or less on the score of compen=
Main - Text .
where the practice is armed with the fullcompliament
 : ment any counterfeit money  ( knowing it to be so )  and shall ei= 
money applicable to the indemnification of the party or parties 
of receiving some gratuity for employing their future time and labour for the 
to participate of the Punishment of Theft will be
C 
are the set of  " inferiors "  he has given him already to talk to write or  _ 
facts notorious and in direct proof  _  will manifest 
For the cases in which a man may happen to be concerned
or Twenty Years , all these things make no difference . He is 
Of Obstinate Waste or Usurpation 
administration to oblige the people to stifle their affections , 
 [  ( A )  In consequence ]  It matters not whether 
my Lord , and , at first blush blush at least , a still
-daneum to meat is expressly reserved as well as
prevented the abuse  _   ( I speak of the individual abuse
allowances as under the terms of this agreement were made or
have been incurred . In some cases however the thing may chance
 : pacity . If it were not for the gain a Man could have no Motive
 ( C ) 
But
I am a Country Clergyman  _  I wish to
need not be inserted in the Code  _  I use it here only
Where the quantum is not settled by Law , what is most 
the street of a town or village ; or even in a
64
-tions , terms , conditions , powers , limitations and restrictions 
declared and agreed that upon the decease of the Survivor of the
him to be in possession . It will at the same time be a 
Will our author stand to this conclusion ?  
13
 " a Contract between the Lords of the Treasury 
5 . If by solemn agreement or judicial sentence she be already 
responsible
the Penitentiary Act . 
to wit by an Act of the 28th of March 1794 Ch.15 , as also 
be by the establishing of some pubic works , in which 
of the 7th of July 1794 the said Lord ' s Commissioners 
capable of being number ' d & ascertained ? 
Lawful causes for being concerned in harbouring a 
Of obstinate waster or usurpation . 
a foreign state in amity . 
-point under the management of any Overseer appointed by 
of the author of the satyre they tend in a considerable
Exposition
always be replaced or repaired at the long run ; though it may
The last negative Clause is inserted for the
-pose  shall have been granted by the Court before whom such 
Mr Ford will easily conceive  , that the Building , 
exported to it , and , with the black letter book of experience 
of 1000 Convicts in manner herein after menti-
seven
be more certain of being able to defray . 
in
 " hardships that for a considerable time past they had laboured 
Are the same as in Personal Insults which See . 
here
and some time  ( but I do not exactly know 
meant not to give such permission :  and that whe : 
labour . It must therefore be the fruit of the labour 
plain dealing & deceit - truth & falsehood - right & wrong -
 " a man whose greater opulence created greater influence . He 
as are punished with that punishment . The form of the 
goods or representations of them Shall be hung about his
Supernumeraries .  " Give me for only two years what
on the ground by itself , or with other scraps of paper that are actually 
a man , or upon something that is , or is capable of being , a 
be a horse in the sale of which the fraud was committed , he
computation shall be formed of the number of deaths that may
not the purpose , at any rate not the declared purpose of 
reason for giving an extraordinary degree of protection 
be it money or moneys worth is called a Fee .
of course be punished according to the nature of the injury :  the Of : 
-bute by their own money to the improvement of the said 
to dispose of it ; whether by making use of it himself ; or by trans-
not do much good to a prison by governing it ,
place and the party injured shall receive compensation or not , and
 " -nessing his sufferings with the most perfect indifference . "   _ 
2 . He may be prohibited from holding correspondence with 
 : dice of one ' s own State but may also be committed to 
knowledge the fact in question happens to have come .
question .
 : though he should fully make known what it is he has
a Chapel fit for the use of such Convicts Officers and Subor-
the 
Jeremy Bentham to be Governor of the said 
Instructions to the Judge
Article 1 . Already acceded to at the first word , 
agrees with every Species . There is not a Rule of Logic better known
outrageous , tumultuous and mischievous manner is 
19 .
4 . _  Of partaking of public diversions attached to a par=
Fluctuation of in & Uncertainty in the Decisions
nothing to fear from great persons , so long as he
Would 
if it belonged to him who gave the Command .
habitation and enlarging his premises . This ap-
Extenuation
have reformed them  _  would you have the Country receive 
-remy Bentham , under the name of a Panopticon or In- 
 ' patience in the management of their farms , and the rearing 
power of parliament , or give him privileges exclusive 
ingenuity into a lucky hit , an occasion turns up
Besides this it is for the reciprocal advantage of all 
-chief than the latter . 
be
the 
& throw day light upon motives . 
aside and turns technical  _  Men lose their 
inserted might stand as follows . After the words
the words of Sir Philip Yorke and Sir Clement Wearge , 
of industry , if he ever had any , and lost his talents for want of 
the noblest incitement to the Study of the law 
whole of the expence at coming in . Fitting up & 
C 
for example our Lord the late Bishop of Rochester
divisions that have been given in several cases by 
 : ral , and for any special damage as also for the general at
from good . By wearing , those differences are partly obliterat=
Articles of Agreement had , made , concluded and agreed 
 " hibits .
apprehension of error venture to state them as 
2 . He shall be imprisoned or confined to hard Labour for Life .
of pusillammity covers itself with the mask of respect and 
appear to have an interest in the house or such
can be assigned 
New South Wales , for want of 
 : gree of time , and mean time expose him to a considerable 
The gentleman who comes out of the pocket is
only petty ones are yet Offences but this 
 " Dr Price "  insert ,  " Provided that in the first year ' s
40
Robbery being an Offence against Property and Person both 
may be set astride the horse with his hands tied behind him
gravitation & , in the same sense as he 
sum , by paying him 18 for every person 
-ther with interest at the rate of five per Cent per 
55
one time pulled the hand of a Nobl Noble Duke , 
Assaults .
Another provision in the same statute seems at least 
encrease of charge hath accrued hath not happened through 
 : ed or preserved as a means of defending a country against the influ=
17
It may be thought that pawning another persons  _  
Parliament , by the Letter which the Duke was ill-
be punished in the same manner as any other man
Kissing Point , another district , they dangerously wounded a 
14
=ter , in every thing that is not incompetable with
every Term , & the Court is to give such orders 
complain of the  " crowding "  of their Gaol with Prisoners 
Where his Wife was unwilling , or by reason of absence
behaving in any other way as if no such arts
for the Law giver is somewhat curious :  Beside man , the following 
 : stances , that the motives to obedience 
Of Theft or Stealing
C
year ; and besides that for the space of a day for every  [ sixpence ]  of
If it appear manifestly to be of certain greater value he
 : mitted to prosecute . 2 . Persons giving her information ex=
 " had in many instances proceeded from a want of that attention 
where nothing is broken and an Entry where nobody
26
Peace with the Republic of France  _  
according to the number of years during which such felon 
the presence of another is more or less injurious according as it 
 : mony of some of the confederates . This is owing to the par=
with rice , pease , potatoes , or other roots commonly
have to pay that sum over again to his Represen-
truth
merely of an act of political delinquency ; a distinction which the Le=
sown with that grain , there was a reasonable expectation of its
1st . I shall establish a Definition of the Crime . 
floors of the Treasury and the design - the only ostensible one , being
But this presumption may be defeated by particular 
in which said building or in some building or 
whole Establishment and so occupy or dispose of the same as
the same
effects , of Treason . When a man coins false money it is not
of a local nature ; and are without the limits of the present under=
the said piece of Ground will when purchased be according to 
with the more violence they burst forth at last when
for such transportable Convicts , as the several gaols of the 
the quality to the choice of the said Jeremy Ben-
Government of a good man is like that of a father The
whole expence of building , without any advance 
 " Then wearing at present a very promising app appearance ,
 : ans and Wards . 
The same principle has lately been applied by 
such escape , irresistible violence from without excepted :  provided
 : fer for a transaction in which  ( in one way of considering it )  
Military Order of St George of Russia and Brigadier General 
14 .
powers with the less force is it necessary to act upon
Wife or Sister the first time I come near them . 
consent being obtained without an equivalent it is 
adopted for this and the subsequent Definitions , are 
 " impediment or neglect of divine service pp 10,11 .
of our own Country to the main Body of the other
31
person duly appointed by his Majesty as Feoffee to stand seized 
22 .
If an offender having stolen embezzled or fraudulently 
under the auspice of his Grace :  and I had the satisfaction
sold  +   ( or let )   ( the punishment shall be as follows )  may
30
 [  ( D )  Uneasiness ]  It matters not how slight the contact is by
of his calling . )  A gentleman is that of independence .
The mischief that can be done in this way by one offend= 
of course no secret , such was the conversation on the subject ,
 : rience we are allowed to infer , that 
to deprive the legal representatives of the said Jeremy and the
& to be published by the Bishops .
taken not to fulfill it .
-ments and stock to be settled by two referees , one to be appointed 
more than human in the bulk of men - not the
that branch of the
proved by some additional collateral evidence it were worth 
Bentham of Lincoln ' s Inn Esquire , of the other part .
for creatures if there were any such , that have chance to govern 
rules themselves unerring , rules that do not err , from somthing they 
private stock destined to have been added thereto is though 
of legislation or of administration . 
The French nation , and the whole civilized world in 
answer the purpose . 
the length of solitude , is not of itself sufficient 
a guinea for the pleasure of exposing You to
Whereas in and by the Statute passed on the seventh 
 : bourhood thus saved . How the Neighbourhood is to be 
real enmity , services thus bought may reasonably be suspected 
 " of May Poles & other Sports therewith used so as the
Frauds relative to the Coin .
C
the Judges who try them , what number of them it may be 
a
Extortion
by the humiliation of the Offender . 
he has given in amends 
=hension seems to be rather less in this case than even in that 
so much as the primary object in view . To a mind 
8
Of Offences against Property
 : fence against the Class as such , but so many Offences against so many
the Building cannot in any part of it be post-
41
in 
danger would appear to a person of ordinary prudence ; in case of
Lordship adorns at present . It is in answer to 
13
 " governor ordered his whale boat to be well armed , and to proceed
always in the same oblique and tortuous line  _  
and his said Successors the more forcibly to the
stand justified , for putting any kind of act under this title ; that 
from and over and above the taking :  tho '  I believe it
as congregations . No Minister , no congregation : 
serve mere
 [  ( C )  Consenting ]  1 . The party is to be deemed to have consented 
of Foreign Ministers . 
 " loix , l ' homme a ses loix . "  But then 
 : stands silver chasing for instance or engraving can get the 
the imputation is cast upon him behind his back he has
-tion on Art . 22 - relative to the satisfaction 
-hancement upon each  ; such account to be accom-
that can either be transported or kept in the Jails . it would check the imprisonment
of Individuals :  of such Individuals to wit who happens to have
-portation of Felons and other Offenders and to authorise the remo-
some degree to mitigate the natural infamy . It might on 
 : stances to fail :  especially as the Jury , in order to do their parts in 
the reprobate , if there are others in which they are 
 ( Your Lordship may venture to assure him )  is the likeliest place for 
 <gap/> 
With regard to the object , whatever is done for the purpos=
Estimate made so as to exclude all persons 
C
 " Woman "  is nugatory , and being incomplete without
necessary as that of some other parts in the popular part of the Law .
- yes and in New South Wales as many Ministers
Honourable the Lords Commissioners of his Majesty ' s Treasury 
those which his Majesty is enabled to give to such Overseer as
any body those who had no right to depart or those who 
Art.1 . The said Jeremy Bentham , for and in 
pernicious consequences ; since as far as it extended it would
B .
the first year .
being 
of power a spy of the police for his standing salary or 
ing that must content us . 
irremoveable improvements of every kind made in or upon 
C
 " the losses which they represented , and they must be sensible he 
8
to the one hundred untill the number of supernumera-
or a pleasure of Expectation ; a pleasure of the concupiscible appetites or
the total number of such supernumeraries , reckoning from the 
ment 
in question may betherefore
lately translated to  <gap/>   <gap/>  was to be translated
-bed "  . As to the word  " prescribed , "  what it was intended to mean -
13
opposite
can 
 " or by an act of the parliament of Great Britain .  "  
supposed some Period posterior to and distinct from the
 1 . Page 109 . April 1798 .  " The  <gap/>  delivery of grain was so
tender compassion to the headless nation , than your hapless corre-
very time  ( as we learn from the paragraph next before the
trouble or inconvenience to himself that is worth
to these privileged foreigners against all injuries what=
& reasons .  _  Ah !  why did I not see that fatal page
 : pressive of a greater or less degree of contempt according to the
 " districts , and collect from the respective settlers such of their
 : fectually disable him from ever practising the like impo= 
in her Imperial Majesty ' s Service , Brother of the said Je- 
Disturbance of Guardianship is where a person without 
is to be collected from the circumstances of 
employ for the discovery of offenders , bad money is compa=
by no means out of sight :  they are determined by the limits of div- 
consenting  .
-bit even so much as in the way of reference . 
to be mentioned first . This being his predetermination There was 
would continue to be giving to him otherwise , for 
 " the soldiers rushed in to save the life of Cole-be . His conduct 
perhaps
C
are few of the acts that can be committed to the preju= 
 : buse or defamation whether by words , sounds or gestures .
a discretion in any Government , who is not 
footing
is the sole resort :  & before the bar of the public at
for reconne recommending a friend to look at it : 
Cases the Conception of it ' s distinctive Characters more
statement of the prices at the two periods in question & 
2 . From inundation . See the Law concerning Inundation . 
 : pular as it is to be wished they were . It does not , it is true , 
extorted from their benevolence . Their inducement 
or Assignees jointly or successively of the said Jeremy Ben-
 : ple Personal Injuries by Forgery :  or of Forgery in subservi=
THEFT
which beats the candle out of his hand or knocks him 
the suit of any particular person of that Sect , Class or Com : 
familarized to it by experience it would scarcely be an
truths . Does the fiction  _  does the feigned punishment go too 
Reasons .
wanting 
Great persons giving themselves this trouble lay the
63
offence . The profit which the punishment must be made 
Under them it is said to be comprised :  By them it is measured . Mathe
to distinguishs out of all habits as I am with 
that he was never to be trusted ; that he had put off his habits 
for the son or daughter , or father or mother or other blood-relation
Act in question  ( the Act of 1794 for the erection 
Offences against the external Security of the State .
to be unable to make conpensation for the loss :  and this al : 
of 
Sir 7th May 1801 _ 
17
produced by any Penalty that could be assigned when 
Punishment .
-on his life , Remainder to the said Samuel Bentham , Re-
But this presumption may be defeated by any Act or Prac : 
of the actual price and expenditure at the said later period as of 
proportionable multitude of complaints . Innocence 
If a married Man and a married Woman commit 
to be of pernicious tendency . As in these cases it will be impos=
to be made to Mr Bentham ' s Representatives . 
-pression of it was consigned , bears date the 
Art.6 . The said Jeremy Bentham and his Suc-
it , one of those petty Offences which the Author
to
such Feoffee shall stand seized of the said real Estate and pos-
and of all and every offender and offenders who shall be delivered into 
upon a par with it . See Tit .  [ Proportion ]  Rule 1 . There is no
Title .
ordinary Degree of preventing it .
1 . Where for want of the thing stolen the offender is in imminent
has been unfortunate but not culpable . She has parted indeed
compensation , for the time and materials consumed 
other way subject to its jurisdiction . Nor indeed is the man= 
it ' s Signification  _  Theft  _  The other more technical 
in exchange for all the money You have or for an equi= 
-session of the piece of Ground aforesaid , at his own expence cause 
be appointed for the purpose  , should have one  , so as not to 
stiled Offences against the Law of Nations . 
 [ 2 . He may be made to suffer penitential Imprisonment for 
Notes .
 [  ( A )  Second Offence ]  By a second Offence is to be understood on this
-muel Bentham if there shall be any person duly appointed 
The guarding against the calamity of Conflagration is an object 
 ( D ) 
towards such Building on the commencement of 
 " return he informed the governor , that on his arrival he found
a favourite Aphorism of their own , that to 
such as to exclude hope of acceptance , that could b
not infallible .  _ 
5
effectual prevention of the return of every individual Convict 
in the way of Medicine . 
20
be graciously pleased to appoint the said Jeremy Bentham to 
will be differences of opinion :  but either their Differences
the Premises &c in consideration of the said 
One branch of the secondary mischief , the pain of appre=
Servants Law
Excuses are I .
Of Sharping or Fraudulent Obtainment . 
of the encreased prices of sundry Articles 
to the intended establishment  , with the fitting up and stocking
of the Offence .  [ See Ch :   ( Proposition )  Rule . the Punish=
hundreds more into a loathsome pest-house . 
appearance of the piece of money , it is exposing a Man to suf= 
are not  _  If not , it is to no purpose to set a Judge
when there is not much bad Coin current in a country ; it never 
knowledge imports is that the matter of fact is true , or that 
thus abused it is hoped he will be a little more careful in the descrip=
to give the party injured in the way of compensation would
it brought up in a condition superior to her own .
Art . 5 . And Whereas in and by the said Statue of the 
recollection of )  I have observed in how meritorious 
or ones there , puts himself under the law of the place . 
the first year  :  except only the amount of the premiums 
82
 : mount )  by taking bad money , than against suffering from 
forming a kind of fence which served to detain the sand and prevent
the body boys are not always in the school room ?  
108
-sons of that description are received in such large
 [  ( B )  Degree ]  1 . The degree of heedlessness is the greater the
C 
congenial and combined exertions that unless a few
p
people in general on their guard against bad money . 
House of Commons , Febry 3d 1801 1800 , on the proposals of Buonaparte for entering 
of punishment , as those only of the lowest stand in need of . 
within the compass of a year reckoning from the said day :  
10 P.196 . January 1799 .  [  A man was  " sentenced to receive a 
Each Prisoner shall be constantly supplied 
where public money is thus disposed of - in my
own . 
8 . Blight
medical of the establishment  :  together with the economical 
controverted . The stating some of those propositions which 
God of Great Britain France and Ireland King , Defender of 
than   <gap/>   it . The chief use of them is to subject the
every body would call Theft . Had the waiter brought it in 
are who may have occasion to accept the counterfeit foreign
wages as are to be got for digging :  but a man who under=
would be so small as that to a man who had already been
 : stance no man might be allowed to use the instument in 
C
 " offspring "  # is mentioned by its ci-devant Judge Advocate , and still 
where a Substantive is required .
-purtenances during his natural life with the same powers as 
not have been allotted for the purpose . In the most common
Such are the methods that have occurred to him 
who took away any Utensil of his Neighbour ' s tho '  
enjoyed by the Devisee or Devisees of such Survivor as 
2 .
prosecute him , or under an indispensible engagement to de : 
C
 " the various Burthens upon the County Rate , are already 
Manufactories and the Hospital , Cloathing  ( an article 
conducive to their Security .
Note
It is plain therefore that a punishment
to be notified by the Principal Secretary of State for the 
 +  If the reader will take the Trouble to cast his Eye
occasion an Offence committed after conviction for a former . And
vice and improve morals without adding to the County rates  _  
for one year )  is not by any means a sufficient allowance for the 
presently )  Government is at no expence at all
Lordship has been seeing that Acts of Parliament were
will often happen therefore that a man will be found who will 
than equivilent after the allowance to be made on the 
the said Jeremy Bentham and his Successors at 
 " for their information :  
are afforded  <gap/>  by
however
faculty that prevented the numbers from being greater . The
Jeremy Bentham his Heirs Executors and Administrators 
mentioned , or under such other directions , limitations and restrict-
shall respectively be made Creditors to the like a-
Your Lordship with the balm of tranquillity to pour
unfair advantage over his fellows .
Cicero , as quoted by our Author , says  _  
the price of Glass by an Act of the 
in all its present Minuteness :  is covering at once
2
In general however it seems preferable to Fraudulent
is to deliver up to the Sovereign of the injured State all 
year , considering the dangers to health that threaten
Coin the more difficult it will be to succeed in imitating them 
of such a weight hanging over their heads . 
If then any such art be employed the not disco=
from 
be subjected to a closer scrutiny .  _  
have to learn the business in , and afford a 
 : vate person , whose solvency he mistrusts , were to pass it off
to  _  
master
care , management , superintendence and controul of the same 
any 
P.209 . May 1799 .  " Some of the people  ( Natives )  ever hostile to
the Woman by Polygamy is not so great as that which is brought
Grace of God of Great Britain France and Ireland 
conclusively
 " to their farms and occupations , without having received some 
 " the former of which is the rule of moral 
man ' s property . With regard to the occasion , it may be 
at the first acting in the desolate island its prototype when 
Duke of Portland , then under Your Lordship  _  to have
-structed , at least as well as in ordinary schools , in 
purpose 
attention may be no adequate defense . 
No 8 Mr . Bentham to Mr Hiley Addington _ 
understanding , could these ideal plans of these ideal Ma-
 ( a )  Most of the above excuses are in a high degree improbable :  but all are possible . In a finish=
or not happening of any event . 
candour which was fitted to the occasion and the purpose  _  and that
12 July 1803
it is probable proposed to concentrate the Quintessence
The misfortune is that with regard to this , there
-ment . These conditions are stated by Captain Collins  ( p . 267 . ) 
and according to , such Contract or Contracts as therein 
 " you are now giving to Mr Campbel , viz :  21 a
for the Building to Mr Bentham , it should not 
 ' From the nature of the difficulties of which the settlers 
being used where a Verb or a Participle , the latter
enjoined not to do . When for the purpose of his being 
to put themselves to such a degree of trouble in examin=
romance in so grave and practical a subject !  fiction  _  and that 
 " Night in the House of the Owner . " 
particular circumstances .   <gap/>   The thing taken   <gap/>  
the sex of the
 ' of the island , and the true happiness of its inhabitants , has , 
agreed that upon the decease of the Survivor of the said Je-
plan the order of the chapters or titles relative to offences of the 
 " they were not so easily frightened , and became more noisy and
and together ,
instruction 
C
if any , is commonly either absolutely unintentional , or at
No . 1 . Page 41 .  " Few places of confinement can be under
-ness is ,  prima facie  at least , to be imputed to the Duke  _  the
where he is guilty , choose rather to be accomplices than 
most not directly but only indirectly intentional . See In=
months before , in the declared view of my making 
 : cious it is in that of a personal insult :  since the slighter the bo=
of Parliament .
13
only irremoveable , according to the Contract ,
seen learnt , that the pretences of many of 
it :   _  he nurses it for months & years :  he nurses
could not be had for so little as 200,000 . It might
of two other crimes , Seduction and  <gap/>  The mischief of it
the prejudice of a foreign state . 
dependent of Yours , especially if the party insulted be 
first instance . 
being , according to such conceit and conspiracy , falsely and 
of mischief there was no difference
knowing 
 : tice )  under the same penalties as the entire process of fabri= 
 " price . He was , however , obliged to direct the commissary to 
thenis then after all the real aim and practical conclusion 
=blance to those which are executed by masters The
As a handful of blackberries or hedgenuts in a country where
C
 " from every one , has become a most insolent and troublesome
Quest VII . Why the Punishment in this Case may
# Piracy i : e :  the Principals int it . False Weights
N . S . Wales
-soners  " of the above description ; which expenditure , as 
included . 
 : cur in producing two effects which are both highly disad : 
tribute to distinguish the things defined from other things they
have become so . 
as materials for the said intended Building as well as 
Reasons .
the Public on behalf of the Prisoners is interested therein  :  and 
 made
is whether it be valuable only as a means of pro=
day with wholesome food :  viz :  bread , interchangeable
Defence . 4 . Military power and subservience thereunto . 5 . Ju=
viz :  if he be knowingly concerned in making or repairing 
 " the white people , to demand with insolence whatever they wanted ; and , 
-ber of 1000 Convicts in manner hereinafter mentioned during 
different according to the various local circumstances of dif : 
ruin me if I believe them , for those which I
Coin will he be likely to have amongst it . 
Persons bound to give information  [ to the Judge ]  may be ei=
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
is its tendency to distribute itself into small parcels and 
conformable to office the usage of the office .
10
8
be done on any Side or to any Degree to the plain
offence is in the character of a simple personal injury , the more atro=
in a particular manner there be any which are not necessa= 
Fourthly , the positive tokens of satisfaction given ,
which might be put .  _  
at and from the term of such decease then such Feoffee shall 
-mencement of the said year , according to the London Bills
countenance or discountenance
awkwardness .  _  
1
a piece of gold or silver  :  or representative only :  that 
-fore be seperate , and distinct beings . Yet
Rational as by commanding a Bystander
I live . I hear from all with whom I converse that that there
at the time of the marriage or have acquired since , any property
 : tire whether in prose or in verse is not only more apt to be
C
The next thing the definition tells us of a Law , is that it is  " prescri-
of years during which such felon shall have been under the 
 : rations were to one another , the better . 
or slight
-tham of all benefits from the said Buildings Improvements 
or endeavours to make amends for the whole or any part of
1 .
witnesses may be bound to give it either 1 . Without Sum=
violence from without excepted  :  provided that they 
general now found themselves placed has been already stated .
1801 conversing on the subject in confidential whispers
trifling utility
was it offered to either of these gentlemen ?   _  was 
the Jury ' s persuasion of that circumstance . The punishment is 
 " the crews of two boats , which had been permitted to go to Hunter ' s
itself ; or in any other manner ; as by jump : 
In short if we may be allowed to say what it ought not to be :  it ought
it is not all uncommon for counterfeit halfpence to be passed 
approaches very near to the nature of Theft
the purpose of covering guilt in every Case and 
of
of adopting it into their own conduct , or of so unseating their antient feelings
-ingly laid out thousands , upon the faith of the
any other person whatsoever . 
 [ G Bound ]  1 . Everyman is bound on such an occasion
To return therefore to
but whose Successor is so . 
 : ment to the very offence which is intrinsically obnoxious seem 
may be pleased to observe to him )  is up already : 
 sary 
 : pear to him , not to be of a Value worth regarding . As if it be lying 
Grudged  ?   _  says a voice somewh somewhere  _  
though most who either asked leave or without asking 
portion of matter on which such stamp has been put by such
5 .
person so threatned were any near relation or friend or 
But this does not make it unlawful for an officer to
Note .
I happen to have
Ch . III . Grounds of Expectation with regard to the circulation etc of the 
quarters to seek the acquirement of wealth by dishonesty 
Proposal
same paragraph , at the very time of giving this assurance , the 
And Whereas in and by the said Statute of the 7th of 
 ' as he hopes will incline the government to consider the
at the same nosegay with the Inspector of Hulks
4
Of Rest  _  as by drawing away
be passing by to see the condition of the goods and serve 
7 . Acts which are detrimental in an inferior degree to 
u
 <gap/>  , than the person of whom we are here speaking .
the said year together with the times at which they were re- 
injury , an act of unlawful  <gap/>  an act of kid=
having the Land in Fee Simple was incompatible
by the epistle from the Upper-floor to the under  _  
 " benefit of the settlement . ]  One of these people having , in the presence of his 
the same edifice )  a man may without much 
new service be to such new services .
3 . Si tempore secundo sententio testiculus sit nullus , glan=
for criminal devastation .
her own consent , so it be against the will of her husband :  or whether
the necessary
After stating , in regard to the object of the 
-mate utility  _  each consistent with its own principle  _  which
Before we proceed further , the employing of 
2
as  _  
to wit a sum equal in amount to the damage by the 
force and direction to the censure of the World . For this 
as one that does . 
may be in danger of being confounded with . I
-lishment was required to be set on foot :  and , in so doing , 
police
 [  ( C )  Intention ]  There are several circumstances that
must likewise be addressed to beings 
and such bad ones as are most current are not in any way 
since it is scarcely in any other way than by putting in action
 : ry is done to the domestic Country  . All people who come to
Distinguishable from this in it ' s Conception , though 
when it may be of Use to beat down a Fruit or guard against the 
to authorize the removal of Prisoners in certain cases , and for 
C 
have employment , two parties must concur :  himself 
it to others ; and by conciliating his affections in favour
for his Penitentiary Plan , and that for a single 
being is insignificant , but that accident may throw
 : course to this effect ;  " I the Officer in this case appointed by 
meaning was
the
yet in any System of established Jurisprudence are how=
the part of the said Jeremy Bentham :  such payments to 
16 .
is what happens every day :  but it will be strange if , 
Report , exhibiting in detail the whole state , moral and 
 " under , in the hope that he might be induced to receive the 
 " The prisoners , in their defence , brought forward a crowd of
more cruelly , who  ( as our Author relates 
concern being thereafter relinquished accordingly  _  and such
Parliament is  " penitentiary House "  , which had 
 " When this man was brought out to be punished , several of 
years .
accrues from the using it as long as it lasts , but
in cases where no material interruption might ensue 
C 
that by being deposited with the pawnbroker they are 
 : gainst condition . 
the provision in question and nothing else can 
N . S . Wales
of persons in charge thereof during any or every moment of 
to any Assignee or Assignees of the said Samuel as aforesaid , 
rest all animals and vegetables by name . This being the case with 
Heterogeneous as the several species of Forgery are 
the fresher they both are , the more easy it is to discover 
to amuse themselves with  " hopes "  and  " expectations "  .  _  
course to inform the owner ; much more if he takes measures to
of defending , or stating , or even an arguing and maturing them ,
 [  ( a )  Sixpence ]  The sum will of course require to be different accord=
every part of the gain how indirect soever it arise , so as it 
 [ F Danger ]  To wit of being subjected to bodily pain or un=
known to the owner in such a manner as to be made
C
 : lar persons appointed for that purpose . This source coincides
 : napping an act of unlawful homicide , as the case may
equal part . If the object be mischief so will every part 
the positive Establishment of our Common Law , to 
were employed is a tacit way of suggesting that
death . nor would the desciples of and
7
A man seeing a horse exposed to sale watches
Article 2 . Mr Bentham would be very glad
Penitentiary House or Houses , for the purpose of confining and 
Whereas the delay from whence such encrease of charge hath accrued 
no
upon a level in point of economy with that of 
that
agents of the French government , seem at all to have hurt their reception 
it could not be done otherwise - the whole corps of
 " musquet . The boat was there , but the men were not to be
can contain ]   " from the time of their receiving 
 : neral to be deemed acts of needlessness .
of such articles
Felon , a sum of money applicable to the indemnification of 
7 . Tempest .
two
is therein also provided that after the removal of any offender under 
honourable minds ; unfettered as yet and uncorrupted , by instruct
Exposition .
Governor as aforesaid Feoffee of the said piece of ground to be pur-
There are several other plants which are protected in the same
the
due upon it .
If he procures many different moulds or stamps this will 
in cases in which that mode of punishment was , by Par-
-vented it by drying it up in its source  _  I mean
decease of the Survivor of the said Jeremy and Samuel Bentham
of 
be treasonable Offences . 
these See the Army and the Navy Laws .
-tation shall be formed of the number of deaths that may be 
-pears much too hard upon Government , and it 
wanting in the very first instance of all that is adduced . This 
up that it was Bank note his offence would have been 
for the 1000 Prisoners / :  and an inference equally natural 
in the prosecution of the same scheme )   _  such a violation
purposely
articles so employed or consumed as aforesaid  ; he 
I . Conduct
any or
by the said Jeremy Bentham or his said Successors 
neither finish nor commencement , nor any thing 
-ssessed or intitled so to be as aforesaid , with power to appoint 
 " making known . Before they were dismissed , he gave them much 
on the part of his Wife , he put not away such other woman 
to wit a sum equal in amount to the damage by the injury 
since March 1793 , when the proposals by 
-ship to Government upon this score . What would
10 years , & Mr . B . will scarcely have any 
take themselves in good measure out of the reach of Justice
Under these disadvantages , together with that 
to a House or other dwelling in the time of
species or degrees of punishment to be applied to the several 
If any farther mischief that is not personal be occasioned
If the object be gain and not mischief , yet mischief be 
inconveniences with which the latter is attended . 
 ( a )  For it is performed by the suppression of
any degree of responsibility :  for instance to persons
Sort ?  and if some are , how am I to know whether
in whose favour a certificate to such purpose shall have been
with robbers and the houses with burglarers this
same in kind as for Personal Insults . 
of the said Proposer for the purposes aforesaid , was delivered 
as much as he thinks proper of the confinement exceeding that term 
Where there is matter of Excuse  , the Offender shall suffer
affecting
In like manner , neither is it clear that the names
Gold . In England there is a vast quantity of Paper-money in cir=
the Estimate all ages under ten years :  but he flatters
Coinage or with any quantity of filings or clippings so large as 
Now that such a case will often happen has been shewn . It 
in the whole  ; insomuch that the said Jeremy Bentham , whenso-
sometimes betrayed into offences of this kind serve in 
- " dequate without great inconvenience , to the additional
them And Whereas if such Buildings Improvements and 
=timesin the first instance , as upon the others to whom
Article.1 . The said Jeremy Bentham , for and in consi- 
afterwards
 " met , this behaviour was not to be accounted for , except by its
-ber of the four last years of Peace :   [ though it may increase , yet
punishing the transaction above described is taking an evidentiary 
3
C
more pains have been taken by harsh Laws and a severe 
2 . If it be by doing any injury to the Wife the Offender will
felonies 
trouble to abstain from it even the trouble of a thought 
Another is the shortness of the term which , in those 
these their implements of improvement - super-pensioned
C
Majesty , His Heirs and Successors from time to time by an order 
at large . 
it in one instance )  indication had been given by 
 " they being at liberty to ship themselves on board of such vessels
6
up by and out of the private fortune ,or saved by the ingenuity 
4 
 " archery for men , leaping vaulting or any other
 " might , with but little trouble to them , ruin the prospect
 April 1797
give assistance to any other , if he can give it without any trouble
whole
 " of certain heavy grievances which they said they laboured under . For
mischief done to the individual Jews whose persons or property 
his neglect or refusal . In order to make 
 ( A )   ( B )   ( C ) 
another .
manner as to be made amenable if it was before the owner ' s
the latter ,
is compelled in the first instance to discover and surrender his 
and built a Penitentiary House for these supernume-
-mand only expressed in an obscure and far fetched manner .
down
is
3 . If such other Art be of trivial use it might be worth while
supply the persons under his Care with , 
2 . Besides this He may be punished as for the Theft to
72
 : ter under the same circumstances :  for which 
-sioners for themselves and Successors to and with the said 
hindring a husband from enjoying the privileges of his condit : 
 : cation . 
the 
much stronger , even when the substance of the imputation
or if a farther trial be thought necessary either of course 
 : siderable degree to lessen the mischief of this offence 
for their return on the arbitrary will and pleasure of a suc-
founded things which are really dif-
lone house that is endangered , all persons who
-cation of a remedy . A person so circumstanced is 
Paragraph in which municipal Law alone is mentioned .
trends of the Religious & Moral Sanctions 
=ry for the purpose of any other Art  , the use and possession 
Did the Thief carry
 " be entitled to share the public provisions in the store . This was by no means 
and the thing is done . Power for this there has been all this 
things that are moveable , gravitating , visible , and susceptible of me-
to use them :  to sell them :  to barter them , 
a thing as it is to be presumed that a person of com : 
this outcry about illegality , and perfidy and oppression - is 
not in any event so to be amenable as to
it is altogether as edifying and instructive 
Sea-faring-Man ' s Law : 
Note .
Stock and other personal Estate occupied with the same , in 
C
may infer , that at all times the 
less felt upon the whole than if it rested altogether in 
but
C
C
husband . This probability will be weakened only , not destroy=
Property , fall short in point of Simplicity of this , in
 " very severely felt  , they are deeply concerned to be under 
Of Simple Personal Injuries .
were better should be shewn in an oblique and inexpli :  
 :  ever favour it is thought proper to shew to the rich , it 
Let the coin be constantly kept fresh  ; and for this purpose Let the
think requisite in order for a person in whose custody or posses : 
Act of Coining naturally takes the lead :  but it is the uttering
establishment of that Penitentiary House , whih ch it was 
fourth part of the fair value thereof  _  
 " preference to the man whose grain was the pro produce 
of all the varieties of which Offences of the 4.th Class or
this occasion by Mr Voltaire , +  may pass very well as a jest , but
liable to entertain .
may be requisite to treat any act done to its preju : 
Defence of one ' s self ; if the attack portend
 : ther the same day or within two days after , knowing tender
 [  ( C )  Unwritten Law ]  See Excuse II
to such place of confinement within England and Wales as his 
thing on which he sets so high a value .
4
counterfeits French money it is probably in a view of exchang= 
are as follows 
the greatest part of the counterfeit money is so palpably unlike , the im=
1 . Because as the profit as well as mischief of the Offence 
which they had been transported had expired , and claimed to be restored 
 : ning a farther length than is necessary for
which both Kinds of Distinctions have broken 
of persons in charge thereof during any or every moment of 
C 
6
Question when inflicted in such Manner as to answer 
9 .
8
 " River for a load of coals , had been cut off by the natives , the
1 .
subject of the State Prisoners committed to Cold Bath Fields . 
the Bills of Mortality are within the Age of 
than Mr Campbel ?  Not a penny . For every
day of every term by themselves respectively or their sufficient 
 : ful course . 
the sum which the said intended Governor will annually 
-precedented and matchless distance 
having been given of such readiness on the part of the said 
eye , and by the act of that very Governor , by whom the exist-
whom they were directed  _  but to a person in England who , had
-gers the encouragement necessary to induce them to contri-
 : ance ought to be made to her .
one or more Penitentiary House or Houses upon the said 
to the Title of Procedure .
 : ple Personal Injuries . Tit . II . Of Attempts to commit Sim=
 : stanced . 
expence if work be proposed to be done , it is 
be amenable to law yet it is but imperfectly
 : bly betray him altogether . 
 : ral will be pretty secure , that no Jury , unless they thought him
or a written paper or other instrument which might 
snare . 
man ?  Then what becomes of the Mother Country and its security ?  
thus 
In answer to the Note I was honoured with from you yesterday 
one of these his rules , he would not make another rule to suit the 
 : cument  +   purporting to have been executed by a person by whom it
 : cion . If a manufacturer of metal buttons for instance gives 
serves not any better to indemnity and kind of 
it be actually carried into execution or only proposed or in=
been formed of it six distinguishable results must take place :   _ 
-taining and employing one thousand Male Convicts at 
prohibit it altogether . 
Provisions like these were they often to be   <gap/>  
Bent :  which according to Hudson Flor . Ang . V . 2 . p . is the
to enable him to adapt the punishment to the circum : 
pear to belong to it must be picked up here and there as they occur . 
to the word embezzlement destinct from that of Theft
innocent & laudable Acts done in the way of
the said Land or any part thereof as for the moveable 
Rise was excellent But Cold Bath Fields is up
their application to this  ( of doing the work by the
London imprinted by Robt Barker Xth Assignees of
C
of such Devisee or Devisees then by the Executor or Executors
gentleman to a servant does not dishonour the servant .
parties
2 . Superiority in point of natural domestic relationship . 3 . Su : 
104
being debased :  There are persons to whom a halfpenny is as great 
Embezzlement is where a Man having 
Jews of such a place have taken a Christian Child and
Law was taken from that species which in truth is the only one 
ceived without them . Of them it is said in a certain sense to be compos ' d
in satisfaction for the extra expences relative to
persons whatsoever who were concerned in the injury of=
hopes had best be moderate :  it is a small portion of understand- 
Observation,s
 : ter adapted than this mode of Punishment . It will ef= 
heads . 
the midst of the prisoners  , and keeping the whole 
3 . That , in another instance , he has assumed at any 
peace , welfare , and good government of our said colonies and
Note
has got in
These
great 
 ( the same being wholesome ) 
circumstances relied on as grounds of justification , if looked
State by birth his allegiance is called natural :  when by 
-dent of its failure , by paying a sum of money for 
may be given her of subjecting him to some kind of confine=
No . 2 Pages 42 , 43 .  " Four years ago .. . plan and esti-
indolence is the saving that trouble may be a sufficient
and his said Successors the more forcibly to the reformatory 
Extracts from the case of Hall v . Campbell 
term of his patent has been consumed :  workmen ,
 : main to the Woman , unless the Judge thought proper to
have eyes  _  )  of such a pyramid of official personages
was taken , or to any one who would be expected of
 : ceding titles . If not he has no better warrant for putting it 
C
-session of the piece of Ground aforesaid  , at his own expence 
by such Laws made and provided ; any in this Act con-
by a shop , snatches up a thing and runs away with
Of Simple Mercantile Defraudment . 
Number ?  how am I to distinguish those which
away with it before the Shopman ' s face .
said Building or in some Building or Buildings adjoining 
derived from some lawful occupation he has been tieed up 
32
brought by speculators and traders who occasionally touched there ,
-tations  _  these uncandid these envenomed insinuations ? 
-gorical one :  accepted or not by the County , he has
as his appears to be
1 . Her Name may be registered in the Book of Adultery .
first intended Governor and his said Successors shall on the 
-der the powers of the said Act from time to time appoint  " 
indistinguishable by such plans ? -
Gaols and taxing Counties was not in every point of view 
14
yet proposes 2150 as the number . 
of 1000 , for the express purpose of providing an 
-ever I am satisfied , far from being yet so particular
of a Guinea for example , in this way , seems not in general 
might for a certainty be effected at a cheaper rate , either
for New South Wales as for Man and British
a loss as a half a guinea or even a guinea is to certain other per= 
little more than five months after viz :  on the 25th of 
for insurance herein after mentioned . 
Parliament .
 : on of the two words , though somewhat different ,
the medical sciences . The prophylactic regimen is employed to signify
 : tion such convention may either be 1 . general , extend=
there is in England ; and on the other hand there is much less 
 " his gun with buck shot , and ordered them to leave the place ;
this
a country where it is not customary for the occupier 
sustained .
Parliamentary business .
any given article in the list of those calamities . Such of-
being
Societies . 
 " time he could not avoid observing , that some of these misfortunes
so many Words that  " a Man and his Wife are one
 " found guilty , he was sentenced to receive six hundred lashes , and to wear 
of Punishment , he may be fined .
- missioners for themselves and Successors to and with the 
of his property , considering the share of reputation that 
been consigned :  but , having gone thus far , it is 
Offences against a Neighbourhood may be distinguished in the 
-merary  :  as for example , if two hundred supernumeraries be 
11
Are the same as in Incendiarism :  which See
-tions as are hereinafter mentioned , to erect and adapt to the 
-ductions , together with interest at the rate of five per cent per 
this case the greater it were the less likely it would
13
the 27th of the preceding month  " desiring to be 
as it is probable the owner give to any one who should
appointed by his Majesty whereupon it is therein moreover 
Thirty years ago the indefatigable & gratuitous 
thus to suffer amounts to more than  [ a year ]  the Judge may convert 
offender to a kind of disgrace  ipso jure  ;   <gap/>   by giving
-veral utmost sums respectively above limited . 
Irish Debentures , and the now disused Navy Victu-
1 . Those of a military Superior over his Subordinates . For 
an enhancement by means of a duty thereon imposed by Parli-
of procuring something that is of intrinsic Value ; as the Stick
avengers , or so much as disapprovers of his misdeeds . And 
been under the care of the said intended Governors :  
of itself is false , because if a Reader is lucky
change in the character of the person , or of the system pursued . It appears by all ,
round the less it will be ; and that not only each time , but even
 " protection of the British Government , enjoined the punishing 
at this stage of the guilty Process , because  ' twas at
Parliament  _  by concurring with the Commissioners of the
 " distresses and grievances as they were desier desire desirous of 
the event of any such Prisoner ' s committing any felony after 
reformatory 
there is a kind of relationship which bears some resem=
 : holder ' s Law , concerning accidents by Fire . 3 . The Sea-faring-
the Legislation and Govern-
 ' the carrying off from the said Colonies or Plantations any
or
Stock Annuities . Differs from all the other engagements 
Treasury and their Secretaries in giving to the party con-
in the construction of the said Building and its appurtenances 
Establishment would be in great measure wanting  , And 
17 .
should be more simple in it ' s conception than that of the term
-berty . ]  
66
stand seized of the said real Estate and possessed of the said 
 : ion . 
any 
 : tion :  or matrimonial ; to wit by passing for the Husband or Wife
place  , as his Majesty shall appoint  , untill such offender shall be 
4 . It matters not whether the value of it be 
 : pregnated with noxious effluvia , I know of no particular instance where
2nd I shall exhibit the several exemptive Distinctions , 
is not customary for the occupier of the land to make a profit 
See Ch . Of Preventive Institutions . 
C
 " Our people having frequently visited this river for coals , &
in its political capacity . 
1 . When the thing taken is irreplaceable in its own nature .
and so occupy or dispose of the same as to deprive the legal 
as 
Art.7 . Each Prisoner shall be supplied every day with 
respectively
Bentham ' s mechanical inventions , diverted at Mr Ben-
 " by any Man or Woman of the meer personal
and perfidious Minister and his successors.-
called Felony .
Explanations pushed to this Degree of Refinement
stock destined to have been added thereto is though nominally the 
of the same kind .  " But few Convicts "   ( meaning Expirees , says
Where the quantum is not determinable by custom , for
much as it is supposed she would have expended had she
declares it to be in direct opposition to 
 " at something or other , and , threw a spear among the soldiers , 
 <gap/>  p 92 . 2 . p.109 .  .  .  .
Mr King having laid before me a Letter from Mr Long 
must be given before the mischievousness of the Offence can be
the said Prisoners without the spur of corporal
to a member of the state :  to wit where he has reason 
Bentham or for any term or terms determinable upon his 
the authenticating part excepted  ( where there is any )  which if it
 " worthy of the indulgence . This certainty of punishment has
Parties are either 1 . A Party or Parties grieved or injured
36
in any . If the meaning was that the circumstance of know=
Be 
prisons :  I mean the want of compleatness in 
punishment , the punishment , that is the suffering , though 
-numerary could be taken in to the first house .
near to me , from the oppression to which they had been doomed
Punishment , have established Distinctions 
6 . The evidence of the engagement , consigned to a portable 
Bankrupt . He is then exempted from going to Jail , but he 
of mistakes ; on this account the insertion of this article does not seem so
intended Governor and his said Successors shall on the first 
inferr that even these , had they returned to England , would not
admit of it , be hung about his neck . If not other like
be ranked any offences which cannot properly be ranked under any 
by them
shooting at a distance , or by a wound given in a Scuf=
belongs is administered , has entitled itself a
appurtenances thereto belonging or to belong , for 
or persons intitled to take out Administation as aforesaid :  
Article 7 . As to what concerns the specification 
4 . Any engine which is not of common use in any trade 
 " Compacts made between them when single are
It was not my original  , my Lord , to have
scarcely fail of being effectual in any case  ; and though 
Now 
meagre and  <gap/>  inefficient :  and performance falls 
coming out of the same shop .  _  
intention was that it should not be fulfilled . For now it was 
had saved to him , and which no man alive had any right so
the place in question . For instance corn or other provisions , gun=
have to fear from it . The well-being of the foreign state 
for immortality . 
2 .
Lordship 
except actual eye-witnesses , should not be admitted to jus=
It is now two years since every thing was agreed
 " savage . As it was impossible sometimes to avoid censuring 
 : ance ; such as Gunpowder Manufactories , Turpentine Distillers ,
r
Proposal
selves and Successors in manner following viz : 
the personal Estate of such Survivor as aforesaid , untill due 
 : pulsion . 11 . Deference to Authority . 
toward maintaining
There ought to be a separate Title for every species 
object
 ' will promise the colonists , before long , every European article 
existence if looked upon as future .
the law has determined that
C
=prized in it the very class in comparison of whose in=
Instances only , whilst in others it is confounded with 
 due execution of any legal warrant given by a judge or
it may be very well worth his while to pay
pp 213,214 We therefore think , that by the two proclamations
carrying away or detaining or harbouring the wife with or against
6 18
 ( a )  The term Sharping is rather a low expression .
soon see that it takes it ' s Definition .
Swoon . It fails still more evidently where the Ravisher has a : 
are more numerous than those of disobedience , 
at any rate . The workmen must be kept constantly in pay :  
you had no particular intention of striking him :  but yet
Punishment .
the future will answer every purpose of punish=
 : nomenon which is fearcely visible in other Countries . In 
literal
brought together ?  In the department of wholesome
4 . A previous information on oath of an actual eye-witness
goods instead of selling them out right it affords some 
or their successors
high office  _  a most intimate friend of your Lordship ' s  _  with that
told , that the Instruction is right tho '  I am
this circumstance an aggravation applicable to the seve=
within the Letter of such an Expression :  And
Offences of the former class may all be comprised 
him and the less trouble it would cost to save him .
X The chief use of these instructions is to settle the ideas of the Judge
any prosecution for this offence .
privately
the more scrupulously are they examined . Now the poorer class 
 " receive the grain of this season at the prices ordered by him
fulfillment of promises already made :  2nd That being but
Offences against the external Security of the State . 
 [  ( D )  Guardian ]  1 . The Father so long as he lives is ordinarily
persons these Officers are understood in a manner to 
had good reason to think that such would
every thing , and without which every thing else would
9
of your loss in as bad a situation as if You
be made clear of all deductions  , together with interest at 
 : ferent states and provinces . The above references are exhi : 
none .
pocket the other popped , is a point not less diffi-
in particular they must necessarily be known at the time to the
its distinguishing appearance . The more refined and 
4 . Each Prisoner shall constantly be supplied with a separate
it is not so . If in that which in the former
any person or persons in whose favour a Certificate to such pur-
meant to abandon it when perhaps in reality it was of con : 
restrictions , as are used in our other colonies .
50
Whereas in and by the Statute passed on the se-
otherwise giving him notice puts it in his pocket and departs .
As by
3 . For a third or any subsequent offence his wife may be
in readiness to receive the said Convicts in pursuance to notice 
to draw the same inference in all cases that can ever happen ?  
Sometimes by dint of good fortune , one may understand our Au- 
admit of it , the Husband ifnot put away might be
Justification II .
providing
 : fession or trade indiscriminately be prejudiced in their professional
Degree , in what Instances , to what Purposes it ' s
 : titude of workmen , is in general much greater , than that of the 
 " The settler found himself thrust out from the granary , by
making it Death for a Person to associate for a Month 
score of remitness and uncertainty to the profit of the offence 
with each sort of Law in particular :  For what agrees with the Genus 
3 . He may be bound to his good Behaviour . 
the reformation of the Gold Coin a man seldom takes a Guinea 
Title :  applying in it ' s proper Signification to such
 : ed . Thus if a man spread a calumnious report of the Jews for in=
In this case over and above the ordinary punishment 
Of Matrimonial Disturbance .
the same in trust to permit the same to be occupied and 
4th Without the Consent of him who
 : tained . As if a man report knowing it to be false that the
-estedness and a too poss passionate love of justice on upon
4 .
-nances between the first species and those that were to follow  _  
Panopt 
 " our author )  upon the rules of natural law , 
equally open to exception  . If any person shall tender in pay= 
his having the power . Now if in any case the Judge can be prevented from
6 . It is evident , that an instrument ,  ( that is to say the dis=
Philadelphia . It is not without surprize that 
 : ment having in a manner given up the Coinage of the 
most exactly done by causing him to suffer in a diffe=
-muel Bentham or one of them And Whereas if such Buildings 
Decision nor Opinion .
such questions as shall be put to them in relation thereto  , not only 
The degree of contenance or discontenance which
principal ones seem to be such as are derived from the sources follow=
 " spirit of improvement "  among there hitherto zealous
may be retained by such Governor for payment of necessary 
separated from her husband in bed and board . 
both the danger and the apprehension of taking bad half pence 
-dical of the Establishment  :  together with the economical 
Lucre :  viz :  not indeed so much of Luere as
no friend of the  " great person ' s "  to steal up the back
in :  and upon the common plans not a single super-
 " it was equally impossible to admit or to deny the truth of their assertions , 
different grammatical Modification  _  the two first
exhilerating assurance , and afterwards , by instruction from his
provided any Alteration in their Diet 
necessary to induce them to contribute by their own
At the trial , either party in the Court of Appeal , 
case of arrear as hereinabovementioned  :  which said addition of 
=less these be something particularly atrocious in the case
 : sons . Wherever this is the case the primary mischief of uttering 
the spot is too near me  _  it must not be made
it may happen that a jurisdiction which does not constitute 
that owner is and yet not having seen more than four people
stand in need of it .
C
the Definition in Question . 
is tried .
another without Leave in the Intention of returning
 : mends to the Wife of the Adulterer . Qu .
 [  ( G )  Bound ]  1 . Every man is bound in such an occasion to
the ingenuity of the said Jeremy and the said Samuel Ben-
certain time after proper notice , the party deserted ought to be
by giving what is false . in other words by giving mis-
ing
any Judge , who was not of the same opinion , let him suffer for it 
- " stances which were carefully kept from the knowledge of
To
Because the mischief is to be estimated in this Case 
such as gave him an interest which no other injury
could be employed for diminishing what is genuine . 
incident to the office of Sheriff or Goaler  , and be answerable for 
punished besides by the forfieture of his office 
certain Amount will take certain steps , he is then declared a 
Magistrates . 
-ness  [ superior to what is usual among the lower 
there needs no more than to compel him to take 
 : rent names according to their different ranks :  but they 
estimated from its similarity to the old services . As the fee 
such  " outrages "  and  " misbehaviours "  as would be  " misdemeanors , felonies , 
the provision of the said Statute vested in some Feoffee appoint
4
dilemma for every one :   _  you a bad man  ?   _  you would do mis-
ends . 
year of our Reign in England & of Scotland the 50th
 " Agent rational or irrational "  might be put
one who has no reason to think himself already
 : tible . The mischief of denying protection to persons so
adulteress were otherwise of good fame for chastity and 
 : cessful ; it is not certain that he will be able to clear
accept any Money at his hands without examining it 
wherefrom
It happens fortunately enough in this instance , that 
Note .
 carry their goods about the country on their backs or sell about
this conspiracy of present power with ill-earned influence for 
=quently a persuasion ; and that as entire as any which the Evi=
upon her by Seduction . Her chastity remains unstained . She
3 . It matters not by what means the false sug=
C
 : tion may happen to have . Besides by knowing that a 
Now let us consider the case where the party in :  
 : clusive evidence of complicity with the coiners :  upon which ground 
Proposer Now therefore it is hereby farther agreed that the said 
For Family Imposture the Punishment of an Impostor
2 . Who is to be guardian when the Father is dead , or has part-
we could say we understood our Author :  they would need to be pur- 
P.32 -  . Pemulwuy .. . saw and spoke with one of the gentlemen
Yet , it is after this , that among the ingredients in the
here than any where else . At present when a Legislator has a 
experience . Inspectors spontaneous , zealous , gratuitous ; 
 " intended to receive , and with which it is crowded to 
have been taken , as should have had for their object the 
2 . It mattes not whether the Value of it be constant as an 
the offence upon the footing not of an act of moral turpitude , but 
 " Hulk Plan , and for every other year and for little more
12
66
is  _  of itself  ( and independently of other similar acts committed 
 " to adhere to the reduction of which they complained . At the same 
THEFT
6
part some regard would be paid to the ruler of 
 " to Obey . " 
having no Title so to do .
Governor ' s
 : vasions of private property . 
stock remaining thereon and occupied therewith  :  And in 
divisions _  
 : not stay , or return to prosecute . X
ib .
any one or more of the punishments appointed for Lascivious
 : miss any Officer from his office . 
 : siness .
For it may be said  , that the greater the defalca-
the better observe what new species I have created or dis=
avoiding them altogether depends upon the deliquent .
-ples he has laid down in the preceding part 
Writers have appeared little sollicitous to transmit 
In 
-iary House could not be built for half a dozen or a
# Hawkins 92.93 
to his Representatives , he could avoid calling upon 
2 . If he had probable reason for believing her to be of 
-quired by the Court in person , then and there , as well as on 
Reproach 
Multitude 
neither his Grace ' s nor your Lordship ' s pleasure , has ever
wants money to spend in France . 
 : derable number will also be perfectly responsible :  for against 
may serve for an Example 
in
invented by Samuel Bentham Knight of the Military 
Note
Pp 281,282,283 .  " The natives having murdered two men who
business  _  I beg leave to ask  _  unless for a friend , a 
But let us see however where we are to 
-ther supernumeraries which may successively be added 
that a Man who had taken off the Sheets of a Bed ,
C 
stranger Between a master and his Domestic servants
DEFINITION
given to a punishment of which there remained but two
knows of it . Else wherefore did he take it ? 
to do mischief to so great an amount or not
shall have continued respectively in arrear 
party shall use or has used any art to make
about the manner in which it should be punished . It is 
In respect of giving information a person may offend : 
 " execution of his sentence , since at any time he has the power
Of Rape
16
never saw the inside of a prison in their whole 
Therefore , though the abolishing the duties of the French 
what shall not amount to a taking )  coincide as
 : ly destroyed by facts which prove the impossibility of a con=
have the chance of detecting and punishing
as for the moveable stock remaining thereon and 
lives  _  persons by much too high to have ever 
that purpose is in the English , that of sharpness ;
-quence whereof the effective power of the said proposed 
bad money at the price of genuine . The reason indeed given is 
new as well as costly and courtly structure half prison
under him . 
seek
2 . This will generally be by causing him to suf=
are also known all together by the common appellation 
Imperial Majesty ' s Service , Brother of the said Jeremy 
for reformation . To reformation , occupation is 
restrictive . 
I 
to the prejudice of the offender ' s own state . The defini=
 " inanimate , rational or irrational . Thus we say the Laws of- 
is what is appointed by the Law . 
that good faith passed for small nothing :  that deceptions the most gross , 
It may serve as a miscellaneous title under which may 
leads
offence against good order . Let him take care that the class here in 
 " crops of the present season at the usual price . Having taken
34
Among
-cult to prove , at least by the evidence of sense . 
given in the preceding August , as mentioned in N . 9 , began
known :  as if upon being asked whether he has taken
At the same time in mercantile frauds the improbity 
person or persons to be Governor or Governors of the said Peni-
shall only be privately admonished . 
14
 " man , whether free or conict convict , was obliged to appear . on the 
be the consequence . As if fire were applied
to the first
is to be done . He yielded , it will be said , to a great tempta=
Copper . In France there is much more Silver in proportion than
events will require to be called in  _  subsequent events 
far as architecture is concerned .  _  
ingredients and which has any particular properties which 
The greater Number of subsisting Regulations 
him , rolling him in the kennel . There are an infinity of ways of
must he would be deprived by any act of delinquency of
and that was , to find a word of such convenient obscurity , as 
-servation extended  _  and the enquiry was once 
For the cases in which it is lawful to trespass against 
Annuity  for the life of such Prisoner , the commencement and
maintenance , here and in America , I should not 
 : fer in the same member ; but in some cases it will be
 " is prescribed by some superior , and which the inferior is bound 
where it would be an offence against Justice , provided they 
and the disappointment which is apt to be the consequence . But
 : per Coin will depend in some degree . Where paper money is cur=
4 .
Powers which one man may have over the person of 
him .
this last Clause together with the third , and not
delivered into his or their custody  , by the direction of 
raw are debarred from getting instruction from 
2 . It may be observed too that this offence
Bentham and his said Successors the more forcibly to the 
stealing And in truth the mischievous consequence of an 
may be so closely interwoven with that of our own that it 
Examination of his Report "   . As this Article 
day , exclusive of lodging , washing and firing  :  1/3 of 
such Prisoner  ( he being able to work )  engage such Prisoner 
might at any rate not do much harm to it
the fittest to take care of him :  on the part of the Guardian , the satis=
submitted to that Noble person ' s will , in the character of 
who have a power of asking or
The Specification attempted in the Term
disguises himself for the purpose .
under the auspices of the Laws . She is to be regarded therefore
the
 " examined and understood the object of "  the Act for the 
or Schoolmaster and such other Officers with their Subordinates 
be Governor of the said hereby intended Penitentiary House 
By engaging Associates and carrying on the busi= 
 : rated by silence or suppression of the truth , where
the first instance :  and to see a part of the generic character  _  
 : out supposing himself to have done any thing amiss . 
immediate amputation does not surely cure , or if a cure
issued by the Governor Esq . 
servant
or Houses when erected , with their appurtenances during his 
only and not occasioned , it constitutes an attempt referable to one
if his forbearance proceed from any other motive than
8 . Application of the profit of the measure towards the 
the Superior , and the inferior must there-
 " Penitentiary House &c "   _  being his Observa-
 : ness in partnership , he may , it is true , very much in= 
term have the powers incident to the office of Sheriff or Goaler  , 
use of such necessary enhancement of expence , as a pretence
any other which I may pitch upon is not of the
application
or Governors of the said Penitentiary House or Houses , to 
Government on account of Mr Bentham ' s plan , 
been convicted of divers felonies , the sums payable on account 
which his volition is not necessarily concerned , or something 
Improvements and Stock were not to be the property of the 
for one gentleman , a gentleman already provided for
Confidence in their Conception of it ' s Import _ 
appears to apply in common , and with scarce 
I have the honour to be &c  _ 
liberty or untill his Majesty shall direct the return of such offender 
The details I have already entered into although 
propriety it might have been called by any other odious
piece of ground to be purchased for the purposes of the said 
stated as to the two characteristic features , so 
the Police-Magistrates I mean - for as to drudges who
-ture , had the consent of the Land-owners been forth-
C .
-dom  ( of which a few only have been so improved
46
N.S . Wales
possesses , the general presumption shall be that he
 " of doing it , after the criminal has demonstrated that he is
matter of local consideration . 
 " and , being directed by their fires to the place where they lay , 
To say nothing of the perfidy  _  the wanton useless perfidy  _  
on which those intentions were pretended to be grounded _ being 
sole purpose of its Fabrication . 
translated , in the Minds of those who consider them ,
danger of perishing and he has no legal means of procuring
his own State the enmity of the foreign one is probably 
C
saving a man , must , by deciding against the letter of the Law , vio= 
felon  ( I have heard it said )  is nursed till he is
by resorting to these very patrons & protectors of the
angry ,  " and seemed pleased at being told that he was not :  not-
offences
23 .
has been guilty of an illegal exercise of legislative power , a-
to give testimony ; nor any persons intimately connected with
 " not contain "   [ and therefore for none that they 
will never do as a Rule of Law . It fails absolutely where the Wo : 
and then a little bad Gold , there is a great deal of bad 
 : ment of fire for a longer or shorter time 
 " having obtained the Governor ' s permission for that purpose ; much live stock was sold , 
or Merchant Ships having Letters of Marque , shall upon
 ( A ) 
Sum , to abide by such orders , as the Court 
=dem penis perdito .
culpable or criminal , whether he had suffered Twenty days 
burthen on the Counties :  and already he calls upon
representatives of the said Jeremy and the said Samuel Ben-
Theft or robbery  , is perpetrated at sea  , or upon any land to 
 : gence . For no man suffers himself to perish through 
Penitentiary House or Houses when built with such powers 
enter into a Bond , conditioned , in a large 
stock , and the husband little or nothing , some allowance
to learn that it was to Your Lordship ' s justice , that he is
These questions , I say would need to be pursued to an answer , ere 
it appears that according to the first estimates made by 
Act of the 7th July 1794 the said Lords Commissioners 
 : companied by indigence , is obviously a proper object 
he has fraudulently sold may , if the nature of them will
1 . 
have it , till it has had the effect of doing him an essential 
the removal of any male offender under sentence of death but 
understood , not by those who received it , but only by those who 
34 
thing
the time at which the intelligence was received , of the Instructions
government for
this Time I have perused the 1.st and part of the
 : ly he is to incur it . ( a )  
30
the Penitentiary Act 19 Geo :  3 Ch . 74- 
the proper person , he commits in either case , a particular kind
shall have been under the care of the said intended Governors :  
 : ture are the operative parts of a Deed .
without being looked for  _  in the train of justice .  _  
Woman with her consent but against the will of her husband 
one who has , in the Intention of making it his own .
this will not be sufficient to justify our 
 " Pemulwy was the leader . "  
C
lost :  The Absurdity of such a proposition provision 
Character of Buonaparte . Extracted from the Appendix to Mr Windham ' s 
value , between the counterfeit or diminished Coin , and the
by the King ' s Majesty his Heirs or Successors , which Feoffee after the
For Rape the offender ' s punishment shall be as follows :  
not otherwise a man , according to the usages of
unintelligible
to the Goal from which he shall have been removed  ; And Whereas it 
 [  ( E )  Worth regarding ]  The value of a thing may be 
application
been nor notoriously published , the last act is contraducing
be dieted in the black Dungeon till he complies . This , it will 
objectionable  _  The word in the Act of 
of divers articles necessary for the maintenance of the said 
regarding the taking of it is not Theft although in
of
 " sine die , under the idea , that the County rate , already
the Limits between these two Places in every Case that
upon a bad halfpenny :  but then the difficulty of putting 
shall be settled by arbitration as above . 
agree with any person or persons for the erecting and building 
 + 
not done  _  condescended so much as to profess any such 
 : tection among all civilized nations in favour of such 
- " men on whom he had much dependance to visit the different 
On a second offence it shall take double the sum 
-wise be confined on board the Hulks , for per Cent 
apt to be in people ' s way than any which could lead a man 
is not to be called a tyrant  _  the Englishman , then , and 
appear to be concerned ; for instance if it be a
instant inevitable and indelible injury to life 
What then will it cost Government , even for these
person within that Age delivered to his Care  . 
in Hard Labour such Convicts as shall be re-
Jeremy Bentham  :  such payments to be made clear of all de- 
his hands be a sufferer by it . This is the only point in the 
 : ter a pellation are included Ideots and Maniacs , )  is provided a=
N . S . Wales
at least on Sundays during the intervals of meals 
of building fitting up and stocking as aforesaid but only a par-
could not be effected at a cheaper rate , the law admitt=
with a Sum to her Fortune which which I know
 5 . For
 " violent . Finding that an attack was almost certain , he charged
2 .
other circumstances belonging to that person , the party injured 
11
He is just going to throw it away  :  but another person 
The date of Mr Bentham ' s Proposal of which the 
not have to see the execution of it set down in petto 
 " that they were not ignorant of having this power in their
the first from that of Robbery which it does not
the purpose of confining and employing in hard la-
the said Statute vested in some Feoffee appointed for that pur-
 : volence resulting from the thought of the pain 
1
less  _ 
requisite for the purpose of preserving Health ; for in=
Four features  _  four antecedent features  _  betray , even of
which the first intimation of the intentions of Administration
of persons may be kept within the reach of being in-
but one thing his invention could do to help delude his judgment 
but to responsible traders who have a Character and a
=pudiatio .
would be by being made to undergo a severe corporal pu :  
Shewing the enormities committed , in breach of 
the two Offences for which language has found names to wit Incen=
the Jury ; to wit , either judging from the Circumstances 
Of Frauds relative to the Coin . 
C
such Feoffee shall stand seized of the said real Estate and possessed
-tified to those who are to know it "   [ p . 45 ]  .
Jews he may be not only punished criminally for the calumny 
John shall be owner of such and such an estate . Of this na : 
in threatning to do an injury to that other the intention of 
 : ing in general stands the reason which every state has 
I have the honour to be &c  _  
Upon the abovementioned terms he would engage 
 " the store was capable of receiving it ; and , taking advantage of
there
offences which a multitude of persons are exposed to suffer on account 
year , paying him at the rate of not less than 1s a 
themselves  , and in doing so will point backwards , 
may of itself be sufficient to fix a considerable degree of 
2 . 
said Jeremy and the said Samuel Bentham if there shall be
circulation ; the ordinary monied intercourse is carried on chiefly by
the husband chooses to put away the adulteress the Of=
upon You .
C
seems
attended would signify but little . But this I am apt to
by the Statute of the 19th of his Majesty Chapter 74 , the 
command to all the Judges to prevent molestation
With respect to your Convict plan , I have not yet had an op-
as also the said Lords Commissioners for them- 
 [  ( b )  Government ]  It matters not whether it be a measure 
more in his custody ; he is for the First Offence to suffer a year ' s 
9 . Conflagration .
him to labour at such places and under such directions as his 
but then it is because there are scarce any good ones to be had :  
the time and that the amputation cured , and that a cure
for the purpose of confining and employing 
the carpet  " dictated , "  a word which plainly refers to speech 
whole sect or other class or community of men he may be punish : 
1 . That he has not only assumed , but concurred in the
of which the object is to search out and punish as many as 
- " cretion would have shewn ; many of them having parted with 
cunning . But the material image employed for
employed ,
between ordinary articles and such as are irreplaceable is of more
of any offender under the same such Overseer shall during the 
Of Falshoods in general
any rate in some one or other of the ways specified under the pre= 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
to be the same , the business might be done by a single 
 " of getting the full value for their crops . A few wo words will 
his own "  which I have adopted , or of  " converting it to
-ing Convicts , by a mode of punishment of his own choice ,
THEFT
in some instances within my reach Dorsetshire 
Law of Infants . 
14
Destruction or Endamagement .
real :  for a man in responsible circumstances may probably 
 " if refused , to have recourse to murder . This check , it was hoped , 
 " to prevent its being one of the most dreadful seminaries
was to be paid only in case the dice turned
as well to persons in authority as to each other ; and 
 : part to a distant country in such circumstances that he can : 
particularize those kinds , which he means to 
12
that was not , in every part of it , grossly and in most cases instantly violated . 
 : ed with respect to outrages offered in contempt of capitula=
deceived
P.33 - May 1797 .  " Notwithstanding the example which had lately 
for the Instruction of such Persons as have no more
1
transportation .
have upon those to whom it is designed to be applied some=
Pleasure is comprised under two dimensions . Intensity and Dura
of Behaviour from which it may be infer ' d by Law are
number of lashes not mentioned . This freeman  " was punished to-
of the sort some great mischief is likely to ensue , and yet there 
H xxxviii
of such offender , and also during such custody shall 
C
possess to himself a good place or succession of good places
punishment ? 
lawful Commerce , all of which are done for the
to the Poor . 
commonly with little skill , by severe penalties against the sup=
in its most improved form has been consigned 
offences ought to be treated :  as well in respect of the other 
of its contents as are damageable by fire ; if
Majesty ' s Service . _  . 
 : viduals  , are susceptible  . In the second they are susceptible 
with it . Afterwards it appeared that before the
periods in question and the amount of the en-
clandestine destruction .
sycaminon
 : posture is so gross , that it cannot pass upon any body who thinks it 
a right to land on British ground . Be this as it may ,
in relation thereto , not only on the part of the Court or 
Exposition
as from the Nature of the Subject )  will be found
-sentatives shall in like manner be bound 
piece of ground will when purchased be according
conviction shall have taken place . Provided that if one such
by his Majesty as Feoffee to stand seized of the premisses 
the inclination or the power . But the inclination in a case like this is out of
every now and then on of the people at large for an
were made or to have been made to such Survivor , for or on account 
A . agrees with B . to buy
the wisdom , if good in any one place , will be act
THEFT
is
might in strictness perhaps be used of a Man
cases too what difference is there in the demand for
debt were large or small , whether the Debtor were innocent , 
2 The alarm is perhaps not always quite so great where 
 : ter nouisset non est delictum de quo agitur . See  [ Lascivious Assaults ]  
at the end of a year to that of persons living at the com-
 : posed authors of such scarcity . The regulations made with refer=
C . 
Orders had been repeatedly issued on this very subject , 
and spirited improvers might be  " checked "  and all
 " encumbered with a large family . But the necessary and
dozen supernumeraries as they happen to be brought
by
C
it never was intended by the man who made and executed
 : clusion of a suit ; or in the way of process ; that is during 
C
their respective lives , Now these presents witness and the said 
of
always been :  full knowledge of that duty there has always 
-nary degree when the examples of obedience 
Jeremy Bentham for and during the natural life of him 
in an open place . See Title of Corporal Punishment  _  
an umpire . 
puts it in his pocket and makes off with it . This what
 : sion it was to know who the person was that took it . As if
P . 276 . Decr . 1799 .  " The body of the settlers having again represented their 
certainly :  it showed more what was to be got by talking about rights .
disavowal , in some cases punishes him , in as far as it lies 
 " he practised it upon foreign Coin  ; but to morrow he may 
regarding .
takes it up imagining it to be an ordinary scrap of paper 
discreet person or persons to be Governor or Governors 
there is in this business a sort of inconsistency which to me 
-ons as his Majesty shall by order directed to such Overseer 
July 1794 it is enacted that when the said Penitentiary House or 
on those words . A thing that is given for a Law is not a species of Law 
2 . Accordingly cheating a person out of any
unquestionably though tacitly assumed in the hypothe-
Reasons . 
it . From the time of this determination then he has 
mouth and so forth he had a title . But in these two
the commencement of such year , taking for 
or days on summons from the Court or in Vacation time from
Other Offences operating on the same Subject , viz : 
 : er quantity of Coin of any kind a man has by him the more bad 
Any number of persons may shew the affecti=
 " which dreadfully took effect on one of them , entering at his back 
of the 19th of his Majesty Chapter 74 , the same would
Where the parties are in such circumstances as to
and deference to every gentleman as to his own mas=
an offence against individuals . 
master would be apt to feel more reluctance in con=
of action , as soon as it appears to express any thing , appears to
2
 : duals of every other . The case even of a war between the two 
-cessary for the same being accordingly made up or to be made 
6
5
It  ( that is , Law )  says he ,  " is likewise a rule prescribed . Be-
the influence of some caprice or other , children have been chang=
In a station like Your Lordships there have 
 [  ( A )  Lawful Cause ]  See Justifications infra
us the various , and seemingly irreconcile-
have been
bulk of the expenditure necessary for the same being accordingly 
that the abatement and deduction abovementi-
is 
for the Greek calends , by any such person as the 
Pope , Venice , & Egypt . Of all these things it may be said generally , & as
does
 : to it , and afterwards comes to be discovered . The dissipation
after the letter it was thus grounded upon , 
who have established shops or warehouses . It ought
multitudes at once from all the Jails in the King-
THEFT .
the
thing , each man stands ensured by his neighbours a=
Letter 3d 
sufficient Deputy present to the Court of King ' s Bench a 
Whereas on the other hand the fee simple of the said piece of 
 " of an abundant harvest ; and it appeared by this threat , 
 " settler & his wife , first burning every article belonging to them . 
under the word  " Taking "  )  to infer without further
In the present case as well as in far the greatest num=
but
cease to be so in certain cases specified by the Law . See Law of
22
 " ferre possit . " 
payable on account thereof shall not in the whole exceed the se-
said Jeremy Bentham his Heirs Executors & Administrators 
Ten years , it will to the last be so little worn and so difficult
Intention of making it his own in the consciousness of 
 : sion , like the present . 
7 . Those of a Master over his Servant - See the Law of Ser
again
own this is one way of converting them to his own use 
 : ledge is left to be inferred and that conclusively from the mere 
execution of a judgment . This may either be something in 
or bodily infirmity unable , to receive his embraces .
upon 
C
 " receiving any person "  whatever on board  " from the Colony , without
advised enough to give auspices and signature  _  this
such Convicts Officers and Subordinates as also a proper
to find a use for it :   _  it will sever with in a
-poned to the other period . 
1 . Pestilence or Contagion .
 : ment for Theft were severer than that of Robbery . For these 
better be retained .  _  
-jesty is enabled to give to such Overseer as abovementioned 
to offences through calamity . 
perpetual Punishment ? 
of danger , and employ the requisite measures for suppressing it . So much
 [  ( B )  Any other ]  It matters not who that other person is if 
dealt with , as that after the taking , no part of it
is given to his Majesty to direct the removal of any Male 
This offence has commonly been stiled Treason , and ,
either 
 : sonal be occasioned or intended it constitutes in like man : 
Note from p .
1 . It must meet with purchasers to take it out in the way of issue .  _ 
that in this Case he might be said to make
or uncharacteristic . I am in great doubt how this description
 ( A ) 
Penitentiary Houses should be used principally as receptacles 
6
-puting to him an  " increase of terms "  ; and this in a paper
produced by the Penalty annexed to it by the Law in 
a lone house that is endangered , all persons
satisfaction shall have been made to the Estate of such Survi-
Relations , as will be hereafter explained , of which that
the mortality for a year and a quarter , and I
- " withstanding which , there could be but little doubt , that this 
into whipping at the rate of not fewer than one stripe nor more 
Privation or
down ; or if a coachman by turning a corner furiously were
the first of circuits three years before even Howard 
to understand that he will not do the service unless the 
Main - Text 
Offences against Justice
by the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury or their Successors 
was the plan actually pursued ?  The answer has been
of Portland determined to  " crowd the County Gaols " 
6 .
No 6 7
A thing shall ordinarily be presumed to have been 
C
-tion , kept in bondage .
-tion from the profit of the crime the less worth his 
 grudged by any body :  as if in such a case the 
torture till he burst . 
forged :  it may be false , though genuine . To p . 107 . No 1
-selves err from any thing , or rules that nothing errs from .
 " Give me that sum for the first year only , I will 
20 19
5 .  <gap/>   testibus , si maritus sit , penes uxorem it re=
 [ E Farther ]  If any further personal Injury be occasioned , it
more than twenty times as much as the amount of the damage 
Penitentiary System from its first origin , and having 
offenders "  ||
his opportunity mounts the horse and runs away with
an act can be prejudicial to the community , but without its appear :  
Other Excuses are  , 6 . Want of Intention . 7 . Ignorance 
3
Theft on all sides to it ' s proper Point , I shall dismiss the 
p206 We have also given powers to the said governors , with 
Aphorism 2d
be punished in the manner following . 1 . The goods which
Of Incendiarism .
ticularly fitted for circulation  _  Taken from Bank Paper . 
6
be that it should amount to half a day ' s Wages according to the ordi=
in particular , so long as it is not known what the services are ,
Bentham , under the name of a Panopticon or Inspection 
King was fully conscious :  and that this criminal conscious-
shall during the same period continue to be made 
 " left by the Masters of the transports with their owners in England , instead 
it is with Pains .
A 
as an hired servant by the year , paying him at the rate of 
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
been thus perverted into an instrument of iniquity - a tool
August 1792 . The  " improved "  Colony was thus improved into 
in manner abovementioned , Remainder to any Assignee or 
Writers as Instances of the carrying away , the Asportation
taken into consideration . If it is to be considered that by the
Or if the Offender had been known to have threatned
12
|| In like Manner for the same reason instead of
 : igable Vessel at the time of its being em=
2 . It is to be presumed that the intention
 " the settlers , has lately speared one of them , a marine settler
 : fects of the deserter if he or she have any separate . Such effects
unintentional on the part of the Duke , and , in mentioning 
C
 " brought before a criminal court and tried for the same , of which offence being 
excite
illegal exercise of legislative power , amounting in its effects to
 " Person or Thing " 
instance it was by striking him a heavy blow with a Club or an
must always
at 
personal estate of such survivor as aforesaid untill 
with that treasure which can never be regained ; but it was
8 . When the Act is such as would produce Un-
computation have been expected to take place among the said 
it , is the Offence of Embezzlement .
serve for otuim cum dignitate to the declared
of the gentleman who does every thing  _  was not to be 
3 .
sustained a special damage by reason of the mischief done to that
difference that the Offender is not likely to be so responsible in 
Unhappiness in the Community but less than that 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
this were the Clause adopted , as should subject a
is bound to obey . According to this 
=ty deserted may remain deprived of the comforts of matrimony
 " the governor , who was present , informed them , that he had
make an express allowance out of it to the Man .
there can be no harm therefore in their being kept as constant=
-ception or inadvertence  _  but , wilful , deliberate , and obstinate :   _ 
Convicts for the purpose of ensuring good treatment 
-intelligible . The letter then to which the deter-
shall be requisite to enforce the execution of the same accordingly , 
therefore be censured that they will be apt to 
with  ] 
 " and the various and unforeseen misfortunes which had from time 
that is whether it be valuable to any person in general ; as a piece 
know not how much longer ;  _  he nurses the source
Ancestors had been accustomed to hear  _  
back on pretence of trying its paces , this too according
the 
less numerous class over the more numerous will na :  
of Aggravation . 
punishment if no greater than what would be in proportion
refuses
the Act ?  the cognizance of that Court is limited by the Act itself , to
 " Panopticon  .  .  .  . is intended to accommodate "  :  and 
and delicate points , circumstantial evidence then 
gentlemen rather than not have gained one of them 
11 .
Extenuation Excuse I .
the decreased of crimes  _  circumstances do not 
and the like circumstances may likewise be productive of 
be sued but in his presence . 
of professed this to be their object would they have
 written discourse in which case it is called written evidence
or attempting to do any thing to the person of another in the in=
expressive of the moral Idea , Theft .
Correspondent to the term subject is the term Allegi= 
Of Offences against Reputation in general
 : ing punished by the foreign state :  And upon this foot :  
Of Theft or Stealing
Exposition
The parable of the Sword and the Scabbard quoted on
or  <gap/>  at once . So also may all the members of a particular pro=
 : tentions .
C
been one full year under the care of such intended Governors ; 
at his own expence but upon such terms and conditions and 
given to all - and this at the very time when it was understood _  
payments to be made clear of all deductions toge-
 : culated to impress or exhibit a resemblance of the impression on 
THEFT .
Number of Stripes , no Matter what , which any one 
 : ny one who should ask him and be at the trouble of taking it . As
of his other subjects ; and so in many other instances 
 : ple Personal Injuries . Tit . III  . Of attempts to commit Sim=
any otherwise than by the physical mischief they may bring on u=
with a spirit , which I wish he had im-
wholesome food , as much as he shall choose  :  but the quality 
random calculation . This calculation may be the same for 
right to go accompanied with a determination to 
 " by their people , that they collected their whole force , and , a few 
the Guardian of his Children during their minority . But he may
& the same circumstances supposed , 
 ( a )  1 . For the cases in which a man may happen to be con=
one undivided Mass . By Theft or false pretences or 
the treaty , Mr Bentham cannot but flatter himself 
 " been taken , it was supposed that he would have been capitally
uncommon to observe the attention flag and by the time a numer
Grace ' s , which I have had the honour to bring to light , 
the
which human ingenuity can be prejudicial :  but in what way
House upon the said Panopticon plan , of proper form and 
of it . Any old engagement was set aside , or any new one foisted in , as suited 
Note .
And Whereas he the said Jeremy Bentham hath proposed 
less than half an hour nor more than three hours in
default
3dly . The various correctives that have been 
a certain value he knows or has reason to suspect that it
 " been wanting on their side , of the wanton & barbarous manner 
with respect to an Estate ; and the organs extirpated or
with reference to which example and reformation 
made to the contrary take possession of the whole Establishment 
5
producing , had the season been moderately favourable . This was the
10
were often founded upon , and always  _  
in want of many necessary articles of life ; and when these were
C
for a definition of it . When a man is at the pains of giving us the
itself a sufficient degree of eccentricity to ground a presumption 
common case of this sort is where a subject of one ' s own 
the
a country is a circumstance upon which the proportionable mischief 
19
-finement , or be removed to and confined in any other place , as his 
of Motion or Rest .
6 . If along with any thing which he knows to have a Value worth 
been forced upon incapable minds by experience  _  the unjust
I thought it best to comprehend them under one title ; 1st
in which the instruments should have passed , and 
3 . A man is always punishable for withholding his 
serve to point out to Malefactors the precautions
as abovementioned shall moreover be respectively allowed to em-
broke through by great persons to shake the burthen
Devisees
to be observed - 1st That it would be no more than the
thereof )  shall be laid up to serve under the 
 [  ( A )  In consequence ]  See Incendiarism Aggr :  1 . 
 : main accordingly ; but the household furniture should re=
Rule by their Discretion ; or whether any such points
they are not brought to light at the very time , they are never
 such an act as this and an Theft . would just
 " now the case , the punishment proportioned to the crime , and
as in the latter case from this expe :  
 " he caused the following order to be printed and sent thither 
any person for her Child , knowing that person not to be her Child ,
=ned to hard labour for any time not longer than a year
 : tutes an attempt referable to one or other of these offences .
9
be opposed here in England .
-dred 
given to confinement to hard labour is that in cases _ 
without injuring the principle , upon which 
is a much more mischievous offence than Theft or any Fraud upon 
triflingness of the sum and the assurance which the accept=
reputation , if he ever had any , is gone . Frighten him from 
Seeing how he had been occupying himself , and what
pain of paying it . You have a gold ring 
two or three hundred pieces of such Coin will most proba=
which he is amerced goes to the State and therefore is not 
and the number be reduced to one hundred , then the addition shall
though he were convicted . But that security  , though a very good one 
might ensue of which the following Supposition
Panopticon Convict Proposal 1793 . 
Reader ' s Imagination .
run over by a carriage
said Jeremy Bentham hath proposed at his own expence 
Submersion , or the sinking of navigable vessels , a calamity not
incessantly keeping them in view . 
which by the attention and honesty of the pawn brokers 
Violation may be permitted _  The Word is warped
moral
himself 
superintendence and control of the same and of all and 
fraud has been practised upon that Coin they know that there 
No 1 P . 136 . Decr 1790 . The harvest which was begun in the last , 
perhaps more )  as the difficulty of getting off a bad half-pen=
and is therefore likely to be looked upon with more indul=
under 
three or four shillings or three or four half pence in change 
-very such successive Governor as aforesaid Feoffee of the said 
The first thing we are told of Law is , that it is a rule of action 
prevent his being known : as if he wraps himself up or
35
the Home Department , to appoint one or more fit and discreet 
-nal transportation system , a great part were reformed  ( I
or not is to be collected from the circumstances
Among the lower classes of people this mischief hap=
of as many more , as it might be convenient to give me credit for .
refusing it to all but a few , then came the general 
his own .
which some would  <gap/>  is - that there ought to be no
 " and agreements , between these several  _  
feed and cloth such offender and shall keep him to labour at such 
Penitentiary Establishment the more constantly and effectually 
&
way of those Convicts whose sentences of transportation had expired +  
expence of building , fitting and stocking as aforesaid but only 
C 
The same is to be observed mutatis mutandis 
wanting  , And Whereas on the other hand the fee simple of 
rational or irrational||
space for separation , space for working , may be 
5 . _  And with an addition proportioned each day to the amount of Interest
is not :  Robbery is not , neither is Burglary an Offence
is either no more or not enough to be had of the same sort in 
Penitentiary Establishment the more constantly and effectually 
may call in the Evidence of an Officer to be deputed from the
it must 
regulations are altogether dependent upon local considerations .
us to conclude in Approbation or Disapprobation of 
 [  ( A )  Offending parts ]  1 . Prima vice auferitor ei testiculus unus :  se=
one Instrument , and the Defeazance which is to
Instances have sometimes happened where , from
the conviction of such felon  , a sum of money applicable to the 
view . In Denmark the plant called Sandharre :  Elymus arenarius Linn .
as all preceding ones . Yes , my Lord , subsequent facts , 
legislation ever over the island should be exercised by
52
if 40 , as expected , shall have died , neither more nor less , he 
Body , to exist , must in like manner possess three things :  length ,  _  
former case is therefore is attended with much less mis-
no longer
Government
C 
Corpus Act , and the Bill of Rights , in the 
two days in a state of humiliation and confinement for every day ' s Sub=
the creatures they are given to do not err from . rules that do not them- 
was the object aimed at . This object will have 
of
for
Of Frauds relative to the Coin . 
especially
the gain to be made by such a traffic is a motive that is more 
also not an uncommon case for a subject of one ' s own
The Punishment for insulting Threats may be the 
to any Assignee or Assignees jointly or sucessively of 
their patience is exhausted . 
the  <gap/>  is The concurrence of the party from
become 
which will be hereafter explained , it is sufficient at
62
 [  <gap/>  ]  in the several verdicts of it ' s application ,
from time to time appoint And Whereas in and by the said 
hath not happened through any default on the part of the said 
its wisdom  , should vouchsafe to shew mercy to those who have 
his person according to the direction of the Judge :  as if it
confinement any where in England two things require here
the question . It appears therefore that these can be no other signs of a man ' s
a person in office
In the mention of Frauds relative to the Coin the 
temptation which could be afforded him by the greatest 
received by him  . Provided that if any reduction 
are vitiated and repressed by the of the
the case of the great bulk of the people . In this case the ap=
provided  , by whom instruction shall be administered 
and the commission to governor Melville , the King had im-
-fection according to the sufficiency of the architec-
or knowingly have in his possession or knowingly be concern= 
Art.16 . A portion of such share  ( but unless with 
11 .
sleep , or if at any other time a person were
care of the said intended Governors :  to wit a sum equal in 
on certain other Subjects would have denominated it 
C 
1 .
any person duly appointed by His Majesty as Feoffee to stand
our ,
where it is such as persons in responsible circumstances 
head these are two great dangers to be avoided ; on the one
A pleasure may be more or less intense :  hence we come to speak of its in-
did he take it ?  
 " has no sufficient motive to pardon a convict previous to the
purpose aforesaid a building of a new and peculiar nature 
Preliminary Offences the following hints may serve to give a
very act from which the mischief immediately takes its 
Sheep , that a Man who had taken Plate out of a
constitutes a different offence :  to wit an irreparable personal injury ,
C
H p . xliii
Note .
Defence of one ' s self ; if the attack portend
that they are either complicated with Inquiries operating
signify meerly the agreement , or disagreement 
2
-ment of the said year according to the London 
in
the following Effect .
and determinate .
It
lately contrived a building in which any number 
of building without any advance to be made 
3 . From the sinking or stranding of navigable Vessels . See the 
sued to an answer  [ in order to our understanding the subject , if un-
lays hold of any Article , and without telling the shopman or
was _ not in any degree the result of a  bona fide  miscon-
his own use "  which for the above Reason I have
3 . Those which persons at large may have over other per=
or other of these offences . If any farther mischief that is not per : 
to me to acquaint me that the  " proposed building of 
-ving been once paid for any such supernumerary , shall not 
is the pain of sympathy . This then is aleady an evil . 
object of it . And these effects it will produce in a greater or
be grudged . 
a bad half penny is as great as that of uttering a bad guinea ; 
Servants Law
Duty . They are continually in each others presence :  they
that may be concerned . It is impossible therefore to as : 
unexpectedly and by accident , for instance by a shove from
at the principal Office room for this purpose could not well be spared
that mischief is as great , as if there were ten thousand who 
have left them , with their owners in England .  (   )  The story is as
F.9 Duke of Portland to Lords of the Treasury .  _  14 Octr 1799 .
should be permitted to keep one . 
to the first estimates made by Mess : rs Blackburn & Hardwick 
in the Nature of the Act :  so that if when therefore we
-oned shall be suspended for the first year . 
For a new and less expensive mode
is no provision made in case the Governor 
of his Majesty by the said Lords Commissioners the other
will be as great to those whose principal concern is with half= 
allowance is at the expence of Government . 
 a Bank note and he who takes it  ( a servant
 : siderable value and he never meant to do so
be appropriated to the Coinage , and it might be made penal 
 " expected that they would ill brook the return of the prisoners
I have drawn the Line of Consummation
Of Adultery .
increase has had one or more of three objects :  _  pre- 
 " penalties , on certificates being received of their having brought 
act
Colony punished  " for taking a very improper mode "  . The act itself
Of Family Imposture
discharged . 
in such case
in point of self-interest  ( not to insist upon the fainter motive 
been done ? 
attention he has shewn not to insist on conditions
Instructions to the Judge . 
riding full gallop in a crowded street were to beat a man
to the application made of it in both those instances . 
him in the way of punishment
ways ; 1 . By parting with his property too fast , when 
aforesaid :  the value of such buildings improvements 
or other
as if upon being asked whether he has taken it , he denies it .
old constraints , and who might not be sensible immediately of the change
Polygamy on the part of the Man is an aggravated
if instead of the Fine we take for the Punishment any 
 +  v . Hale ' s Hist . P.C le Common . 
Or , if the circumstances of the party injured were
 : on could be found out , in which the metals used in Coin are 
 : ing to a whole class of persons not individually in 
in the intention of seeking her remedy at Law . As to what is 
-ment afterwards of the Thing taken . 3d Concealment
an Assembly to consent .  _  
some
then to make declaration to that effect  :  and
Of Theft or Stealing .
in order to do Justice upon the Offender :  of the three last to prevent
 " any of their lives , a volley of musketry was fired over the heads ,
21
of partial , ill calculated , false expediency :  as all supposed 
the Commentaries as synonimous , will serve
 : lected this last circumstance , or he might
of
C
on a different Subject , viz :  Person ; or else take a
such Cases wherein the taking and carrying
Lordship ' s Most Noble predecessor will one day perhaps to give . In
amount
so it is particularly stated )  had been obtained . Of the non-expi-
acerrime flagellator :  tum secunda vice castrator .
umpire . 
 : ther for example in or near a House , or a
said Jeremy and Samuel Bentham under the powers of the
simple on payment of the money advanced by the Crown-
3 . He shall be punished in the offending parts .
paid for any such supernumerary  , shall not be paid for any other 
the Coinage is in , the more apt is the person who is to receive , 
the purposes aforesaid was delivered in on or about 
any external evidence ; if then external evidence is required , the 
=mit it if no preponderat motive be applied to determine
In classing these calamities the division of crimes will not be of
man of such rank , fortune , and reputation  :  and , of the Coin which
that had ever been consigned to that scene of intended annihi-
of the conduct observed by the local government in relation to it .
 : bery may have its effect without driving him into the prac=
p
actually have taken place . As for example , suppose the number 
in it ' s Use and confined in it ' s Signification  _  Larceny . 
upon , every thing in black and white , ready for signa-
flight ; unless it be to save himself from receiving irreparable
or in quality of provisions or other necessaries for the Prisoners 
 : companied by inability , in the room of the fine a proportio=
thereof in manner therein also mentioned , may contract or 
of wholesome food ,  [ not limited in quantity , but ade-
 : jugal intercourse with the husband ; such an absence or in=
 " a metal or metals . "  Now in every state there are but one or 
 ( a ) 
in the esteem of such third person . 
persons , or , in other words , into offences against a Neighborhood , and
year after the two years , the saving here too is 9 .
in order to be treated in a different manner from some
intention were direct or indirect . See Tit :  Of In=
is summoned be the same , by the authority of which
=ly to remove the danger , and , together with other circumstances , in a com= 
it may be proper to give to such acts will depend altogether 
granted 
without sense
the Maximum of Perfection . 
within the space of two days afterwards and of his having
expose his character to some suspicion , the being seen with 
mint any instrument which he knows to be used in coining 
If a married Woman commit Polygamy with a single 
of a good definition will tally with our Author ' s .
nursing it to this pitch of critical rp ripeness  _  
of of pensions ?  - Are not support and opposition - 
King , Defender of the faith , and so forth :  and in the 
 " and Jer . Bentham Esq :  for building a 
But , Sir , what ground for all this ?  Is there
present Majesty relative to the building of Penitentiary Houses 
reduction
under
relations of the family .
Establishment increased on pretence of crushing it
to be considered as one Thing
 where there is one :  or 2 . Offenders .
in behalf as well of the class as of the particular individuals damnifi=
for the Sake of shewing how anxious a 
faithful though ever candid and honourable advocate , upon the
 " presence as much if of his sentence as he could bear , they wit-
Helm . Arundo arenaria Linn . System :  87 . 6 . Flor :  Suec . 108 .  <gap/>  Scan=
that would accept of any part of it . Thus it is that with=
if he or she omitted doing any thing that was in his or her power 
a handful of Black-berries or Hedge-nuts in a country where it 
Honourable the House of Commons by a Committee of the 
to be a Minister in Norfolk Island . In Norfolk Island
pretension to be false .
or saved by the ingenuity of the said Jeremy and the said Sa-
head for a proportionable premium to be paid by the said 
Of Family Imposture .
full intention of producing the very mischief eventually
be 
the interests of both states might suffer in a very high 
 " that a clause was to be inserted in all future contracts for 
some recent instances , Convicts whose confinement in New South
make sure of finding a second Falconet to replace the statue of
naturally 
 " snapped it without priming , in the hope of alarming them ; but
 " they found themselves more numerous and better armed than 
chooses ,
=equate , there would be such or such another inducement , is 
real Machiavels to the diminution of the mischief
no reason to think himself already known to the owner in such
circumstance which denominates them neighbours to each other 
For the first Offence and any subsequent offence he may
-provement , which now so universally prevails , in the several
he shall have fulfilled the present agreement in relation to 
2.d Volume of this celebrated Work  _  I there read in
C
would be infinitely too disadvantageous to the 
of the said Jeremy and the said Samuel Bentham or one of 
felonies , the sums payable on account thereof shall not in the 
as aforesaid but only a partial allowance towards the same the 
Navigation .
Statute of the 7th of July 1794 as aforesaid  :  provided that 
these several illegal pretensions was drawn up , the offence 
may 
He can with more security practise his plan of impositi= 
only 
Quest . VII . 
or ichniophantic
Reports of the House of Commons , was at the 
further
In England the
such convicts Officers and Subordinates , as also a 
For Insolvency which has been fraudulent ex-post-facto 
tion , 
thrown on the Sect , but made civilly responsible for the particular 
heavier degree as for Adultery .
founder ' s 
his own risk he has shewn so much anxiety to see it 
 " a Panopticon was to be calculated to accommodate 2000 
of mine , written of on the 17th of August more than seven 
the Margaret Nicholsons and the Hatfields ?  Must my reputation  _  
buildings adjoining a Chapel fit for the use of 
the benefit of such an institution ; compulsion for 
It was happy enough , that our Author recol=
We come now to the second class of offences :  consisting 
Page 58 .  " It is certain also , that under the present system of 
restrictions as are contained in an Act made in the twenty 
Effects . 
 " informed , that no obstacle would be shown in their way "   ( the
 " were gone to Sidney . This did not satisfy him , as he found
of punishment , it may be called passive punishment . 
in the Jails  _  Will not execute the Acts  _  because the expence would fall on government
This case is the more distressing in as much as the par=
14
copper , and there is scarce any but bad Silver ; the govern=
 " to which they were subject in being obliged to procure them from 
officers with their Subordinates as shall be found necessary to 
Indirect ; by the Intervention of some other Agent
In this little piece of history , it will be necessary to
That besides these offences against the authority of 
or any such articles expended either in quality of materials used 
the said Jeremy Bentham or for any term or terms determi-
the intended first Governor is so anxious to establish 
1 . If among the instruments necessary for making Coin 
the servant shall be forgiven . The master is sensible of
made up or to be made up by and out of the private fortune , 
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
no- 
contiguous or near adjacent :  as if it be in
 : faction
face that it was taken , or to any one who would be expected of
 " are convinced of the utility of the scheme , will be less averse
 : site sex and therefore the chance of obtaining a new alliance ,
number , say 1000 . With the benefit of Mr Black-
placed in a said situation in which he could no longer help himself ,
C
All these considerations make it more difficult to get
weariness or affright her senses fail her , and she falls into a
in 
for taking a thing which he has no right to take are as follows .
 : ticular place , such as Races , Plays , Concerts , Balls , &c .
Note .
the sole object of the Act of 1794 , by which a Penitentiary estab-
actually distinguished from it by the Law , in some 
an extraordinary value by reason that from the want of something 
C
is so much clear money out of the pocket of 
salt pans would have been necessary ; and unless it was cured in the winter
With regard to his own property a man may offend , 
Mode of punishment of course flogging though not mentioned : 
made on purpose !   _  A more unfortunately-timed
been compassed in a greater or less degree of per-
Section V .
be 
23
can be done for a gentleman , who in the midst of
and the Definition loses that Simplicity & 
C
another person ; or in a street upon his starting aside to
 " only one , to which both communities are equal-
stand firm against a small temptation :  against the greatest 
1 .
15
is lessened upon the whole . Besides the oftner the experience comes
such account of alledged enhancement ; the am-
communicated
to settle what deduction ought to be made on 
-nable upon his life , Remainder to the said Samuel Bentham .
standing . _ 
To act
the time he bit the person ' s finger , this was a mistake re=
or at the least the effects of them diminished by human ingenuity
suspicion on a person of such an occupation . He can sel=
inattention of the king '  servants , in investing the order
 ( A ) 
would not part with it for a hundred pound .
that that object is  _  as to  " transportable convicts "  
to stop a moment , and take a review of the  _  
 : ing the money they receive , as is necessary to secure them 
-tors in their quarterly account to the amount of 
an Act of unlawful Confinement , an Act of Kidnapping , an Act
An Englishman in Ireland , Minorca , the Isle of Man , or the 
of de jure emancipated Convicts - had been received . For at this
was not asked . The experiment would have been 
these absurdities from the pulpits , while it 
that 
In the case of matrimonial desertion at the end of a
under a title by itself . They are in fact but so many particular
we are now considering ; the subject of Law in general still upon 
2
general presumption shall be that he knows of it . Else wherefore 
cruelty on the part of her husband , absents herself from him 
to
=dence of a man ' s senses can produce . If then all that the term 
1 .
to permit them to do it in a peaceable manner . The 
corn that is left in a field after gathering in of 
Coin :  for these by being dissolved are of course separated from each 
9
 : sion ; and that the more publickly the better ; and then it belongs
or selling , or keeping , or carrying , any of the articles following ; 
under the eye of Justice , it is hereby also agreed that the said first 
are contained in an Act made in the twenty fourth year of his 
happen :  if it be intended only and not occasioned it consti=
in principle , that  ( even without adverting to the 
without further rule
a system of political regulations to be  made which will of
-tham or one of them And Wheras if such Buildings Im-
A Report is to be made by the Governor 
-per form and sufficient magnitude for the confining main-
-chanisim :  and in particular  ( as we shall see presently  ]  amongst the
If in either gentleman ' s official or his private calendar , disinter-
Art.18 . The life of each Prisoner is to be insured by the 
1
Suppose for instance that , with a good intention ,
which in the course of the said year might according to such 
1 . Where the Wife having reasonable ground to apprehend 
over and above what it would have paid otherwise :  
therefore would have spoken more intelligi-
Of Sharping on Fraudulent Obtainment . 
Article 22 . Had Mr Ford had any sufficient 
most constant & universal , is gratified in the Method of all
and to observe with what success they have illustrated 
Court , in person , then and there , as well as on any other day 
 : icum 336 . and several other Plants . See Lettres sur le Dannemarc Vol . 2 .
the service is already performed and the party injured is
tacitly assumed is , that the money in question 
Jeremy and the said Samuel Bentham of all benefits from 
49
Of Semi-public Offences in General .
nothing to do but to do nothing ?  - Then again as to 
No 83 Mr . Vansittart to Mr Bentham
seems to be  , to invest the latter magistracy with a pow=
 : ed by appearances . The case is therefore that in some in :  
3
the temptation of fraud no rank of Traders is absolutely 
for as abovementioned , being intended to include 
3 . If there be no disproportion of rank ,  ( a )  and the adulte=
provisions See Laws concerning the several trades relative to the
-ber of persons may , in as far as it shall be thought 
by speaking disrespectfully of a Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales ?   _ 
have been landed there till after the day at which they had
-as on the other hand the fee simple of the said
where the profit of the cheat was trifling the quantity of this
that they may be forthcoming in Statu-quo at the time of the 
N . 10  ( p . 268 )  Feb 1793 . At this time the expectation about
to fill up the mind with useful ideas or at 
 ' under which the industrious settlers have too long laboured . "  
 " to investigate & and admit the proofs of guilt . The executive also
punishment goes beyond it .  _  
 : ding against the calamity ; It may be considered however as an offence
that of other considerations .
 " from the twelve which were issued , addition was made to the 
Magistrates - Quarterly peepers at Hulks - and even  " crowded " 
 ' Servant or Slave without the Consent of the Owner , or the
 " For the present barley , do .  _   _  6 ditto .
the
3rd . offence . The punishment itself might be no great matter
that
18
upon the habitual Practice . Now the quantum of the for=
business  _  men above all exception  _  willing to do the 
-tracting with the Treasury , by a letter written after many
- ' perate  ' indulgence in some of those destructive gratifications which 
 : sons who appear to have an interest  [ in any 
-spectively , for such time and under such conditions as his Ma-
-nized this tenfold tyranny ?   _  
ratio to the whole of the coin he circulates . It is true , that 
tho '  it is probable that a Jury would hold themselves
-ses a being prescribing laws to himself .
may be indefinite , so ought the punishment in order to be
a year into the hands of the Police Magistrates -
is designed to stand as a temporary measure for the purpose of reme=
from convention ; or 2 . from custom . When from conven=
-ring the said period shall actually have died , it follows that 
rate  ( whether in any and what degree he may have exercised 
those suggestions were made :  whether in discourse
the whole system of Hulk confinement  _  the gentleman
 " number of Prisoners of the above description "   [ State Pri-
counterfeits is one only amongst a multitude of evils . The
No 3 P . 210 . May 1799 . A quantity of fresh pork having been for
From the so often mentioned posterior letter of his 
 " came in .  _  
that is
-ging the said Prisoners , without the spur of corporal seve-
l
 ( a ) 
for such considerations as are hereinafter mentioned , to erect 
He rose from his breakfast-nook bench
and came into the livingroom , where
Heather and Steve stood aghast at
his entrance . He came , almost falling
forward in an ungainly shuffle , neck
thrust out , arms dangling loosely .
Then , abruptly , he drew himself up
and walked on the very tips of
his toes . He stretched his arms
over his head and yawned agape ,
drawing-in great breaths that
became great sighs of ecstacy .
hands together between his knees and leaning
transcendent event , the exalted desire of all
Mind is at hand ! " He turned beaming eyes
upward and shook his head slowly from
A superfluous precaution for there was no other car
abroad ; and no pedestrian to cross his path nor to wait
Deadly stillness , deadly portent !
Steve awakened early and switched on
the radio , which he kept tuned to CBO.
The set lighted-up but gave only a low
buzzing sound . He had just finished
shaving when it came on , with a flat
voice repeating : " This is BBC calling
... this is BBC calling ... "
After what seemed an undue period of repetition , the voice
went on to describe the landing of the Thetan colony
in Sussex , in all its obscene details . Then the radio
went dead again , and Steve had no stomach for
breakfast . It was a beautiful day , as firsts-of-June
should be . Steve got out the car and traversed the
same empty streets as he had the night before ,
to keep an appointment with Heather .
Coming around the great mass of the Chateau
Laurier , he braked to a screeching stop . A
flying saucer was tilting and dipping over
the War Memorial . There was a deep
whirring sound , and a high-pitched hissing
overtone that sang in his ears with an
almost painful sharpness . He reversed and
turned back on McKenzie Avenue .
" The Thetans , " he said , " are presumably here to
take charge , as it were , of the minds of the
people - who are probably falling all over them-
selves in their zeal to get their orders and to carry
caped Thetan subjugation . This time . But we no
longer have any immunity .
There can be little doubt that if the
Thetans discover our mental independence
they will promptly give us their hypnotic
treatment . If we can avoid undue
prominence , it may be that we can
move about pretty freely without
detection . If we can - well , then we
may be able to promote our own
interests . What those interests
are , beyond personal security ,
I haven't a clue ; but , who knows ,
we may form the nucleus around ...
" Now , to summarize what I think our
course of action should be . First , to avoid the
Thetans like the plague , for they must not
find us out ! Second , to tread pretty warily
We must learn all we can about
There is just a hope that we may uncover
some weakness , and find a way of fighting
back at them . " Heather agreed , and suggested
that they use Dan as a specimen demonstra-
ting how the Thetan machinations had been
working out . It occurred to Steve that this may
not have been entirely an objective suggestion
on her part ; but he thought it a good idea
So they proceeded to see if the coast
was clear . The street was quiet and
deserted , and there were neither sight
nor sound of flying saucers . So they
ventured forth and made their way on
foot to Dan's house . Dan came
to the door at their ring but neglected
to offer any greeting . He was deeply
preoccupied , and it seemed that the
ringing of a doorbell was to him
a new and strange phenomenon .
When he finally beckoned to them to enter , the action
gave the impression of having been thought out and
decided upon . Inside they sat down unbidden , while
Dan paced the floor . He seemed completely unaware
of their presence . They just stared at him , turning
their heads like tennis spectators as he walked up and
His whole attitude was a mixture of
perplexity respecting his surroundings
and the purpose he was to serve .
Finally , being so obviously on their own ,
at home . Steve switched on Dan's
turned the tuning knob through all the
the Avenue from its many tributary streets . It might have
First , it was Sunday morning ; and , second , everyone
walked , or drove , or waited as a person possessed of
a single all-exclusive purpose .
After a long wait a bus appeared and they
followed the beaming Dan aboard , taking
seats some rows behind him . Steve was
beginning to find the stereotyped , flattish , happy
faces very disconcerting ; and looking at
Heather he found a welcome relief in her
relatively long doleful one
Then he would go back to Plato for a final spell of
real days and would return to New York in late
January or early February . Angelina might be a
little sorry if we were not back for Christmas
as arranged , but he consoled himself by
thinking that he and Angelina would have
plenty of time together in the future . And
Heaven alone knew when , if ever , he would be
back on Moon again , and able to do
research at first hand into matters on which
The recovery of his balance was due to the
fact that he was living , virtually without
expenses , with the people to whom Moke had
sent him : little people who regarded him as
lucky to have descended from such economic altitudes .
( Stamp Department ) while Sally sulked at home .
They had been married for six years , but the
salary raise , on the expectation of which they
had done so , had not materialised . " Do you
know , I had to send back our bedroom
furniture in the second year , " she moaned . She
had contacts in political circles , a school-
friend of hers having married Lester Peron ,
a Mocrat Senator with a seat on the
( literally ) all-powerful Rocket Release
Sometimes she took Harry around with her , but
never her husband , a fact he accepted as inevitable . " I guess
Sally made a mistake about me , " he said one
evening , when he had been left to cook his own meal .
All Sally's relations were 4makrodeb now , but Tom
was a Static Mib , the middle-income-bracket equivalent
All Aristotle was excited at the time , not by the prospect of the
U.S. President's visit , but by a great storm in the photo-
sphere of the sun . A matter which on Earth would hardly
penetrate beyond the minds of astronomers was of general
interest to the Mos , doubtless because their habitat is
not submerged beneath a deep natural atmosphere .
One wondered if this greater awareness of the physical cosmos might
with time instil the reverence which , on Earth , nature inspires ,
especially when one reflected that the rockets over which Mr. Peron's
Board presided had it in their power permanently to warp the
solar system . True enough , such ultimate weapons had not been
used in the last few wars , but it seemed very probable
that they would be in the next one , Moon and her
allies being more inferior than formerly to W.C.U. in the
weapons pronounced conventional .
Lester was not home yet from his formidable
duties and his wife , in the manner of middle-brow
wives , romanced about him in his absence . " Lester was a
Know how he did it ? He 's clever on
the mouth-organ . So when he visited some
craterlet on Face ( ours is an agricultural
Back-Face area ) the cry would go up ,
as soon as he had spoken a few
sentences of his speech : ' Cut the
politics , Lester , give us something on
That 's how he got the votes , that 's how
we came through to 4makrodeb status and
got all these lovely things " - she waved a
plump hand towards her grand pianos , etc :
at the same time a door banged - " but don't
say a word about it , Lester wants his
mouth-organ to be forgotten now . The time
has come for him to be taken seriously
Peron entered , a large man , who had once been
handsome but was now seedy-looking , a sufferer
from stomach-ulcers . In the Back-Face tradition he
prepared for something unpleasant , for this was
the Senator who had annoyed the United States
by bragging how he had once won a trick from
W.C.U. by threatening to loose off one of his
rockets ( an admission which would scarcely help
bluff to succeed the next time ) and , lately , by
of the O.G.O. contingent in the Panama region ,
But privately he turned out to be as friendly as
Mr. Wise the tube manufacturer , to have the same adolescent
openness and freshness , though perhaps not the same
maturity . One remembered that he was a lawyer
by training , and suspected that the points he made
so sharply in international politics were as abstract
to him as those a lawyer makes in a court
The motive would be the same in both cases , to
serve this home of his , in which his heart lay .
Here the rocket man's charm was disarming . Yet
when the time came to leave , Harry felt as de-
pressed as when he left Mrs. Halliday's office ,
exactly a month ago . If even Mo statesmen only
did what they had to do to get GO on an expan-
ding scale , and left the sum-total of their actions ,
and their lunar and earthly repercussions , to luck
( or to Moke ) , there was a vacuum where there should
be a centre of trust , responsible for the maintenance
like a masquerade of business interests in dis-
guise which , far from attracting the allegiance
of free men everywhere , could only repel them .
Then what of the cultural life ? Did this per-
which might in time become social fact
which had grown up during the Moon's
At the centre of each circle stood personnel
managers of corporations , together with professors
and their filing clerks . The students had
bought their college education forward and
were now being bought forward in their
turn . By comparing personal appearances
with university records , the agents of the
businesses would pick on young men
and women who interested them , and contracts
would be initialled at the end of
But since starting salaries would depend on grade A
or B in the finals next May , and since mating
prospects would depend upon salaries , scholarship for
these fine young people was closely geared to
economic and biological ends which , essentially ,
were really means . So , seeing them revolve in
circles , Harry had the feeling that Moke ( or what
Moke consciously or unconsciously symbolised , any-
way in Harry's mind ) had these splendid young
Stepping out in their white shorts , they looked glad enough
to be diverted , however , with the single exception of one
worried little man-student who kept getting out of
step . He looked as if nothing Moke and his
minions could do to him would ever make him
GO ; but the reason probably lay in elementary
neurosis and not in some eruption from those
deeper layers in the human psyche which are
So once again the metaphysics were depressing ,
and in absolute contrast to the physical display .
Mos have an un-American love of parades , and
these young ones , on parade for jobs which they
had to get to pay off their college bills , were naturally
putting their best foot forward .
' Something 's up , ' said Lord Undertone ,
carefully casual . ' The servants are all on
edge ... did you notice ? And the mules
didn't seem to want to get off the raft . '
He peered as it were into the dark secrets
of the jungle . ' Think there 's Indians
about ? ' It was most certainly an eerie
night , exceptionally brilliant and strange ,
for in the proximity of the mountains ,
whose presence I could almost smell ,
' Impressive , ' Lord Undertone said , gazing reverently
on the cosmic handiwork . ' All those stars . But I 'm
a bit earthbound tonight , Trout . I 've got a queer
feeling , like I always get when something
sensational 's going to happen . There 's things lurking
if you ask me . Might be jaguar , might be ...
Hope I die kind of composed , Trout . I mean you can't
imagine the Christian martyrs twisting and shrieking ,
no matter how bad it felt , the fire you know , or a
lion munching , or arrows where it hurts most . Or
can you . Look over there . ' He pointed to the
shadows beyond the river . ' Something moved . '
' Bottle-Foot , my lord . ' ' Bottle-Foot ? ' His lordship
may have thought I had become unbalanced
through fear . ' A character Mr Gilberto mentioned
the forest Indians are said to be mortally
afraid , with a hoof shaped like the heel
of a bottle . If your lordship will excuse me
Small , repulsive creatures they were ,
with black , matted hair and a striking
resemblance to the shrunk heads we had
gazed at recently ; and I have no
hesitation in saying that they would have
so unexpected , so unusual , that only the
necessity of rounding my narrative
compels me to mention it .
I had a distinct impression that the
hut had recently been cleaned and
prepared for visitors . Mrs Caine said
we were to go no further unless and
until we were sent for , confirming
and more definite , namely , that
she was in touch with an invi-
sible source of authority .
Mr Septimus stood in the same case as
myself ? But was it so ? I allowed myself
to entertain for an instant the idea , the
strange , the unwelcome , the almost
inconceivable idea , that Ariadne's arrival
would be inopportune ; and with the idea came
a somewhat vulgar impulse , which I refused ,
to watch Mr Septimus more closely , Mrs
Caine too and Mr Gilberto who would ...
But all three were to the casual
observation I permitted myself unruffled ;
Mr Septimus reserved and certainly very
thoughtful , but that was his habit . Indeed
we were all invaded by a most tranquil
so Mr Gilberto told us , that the wild and
savage tribes never approached this region : at
any rate they remained with us , perhaps
for such protection as our presence , or Mrs
But after what Mrs Caine had said it was never
far from our minds that at any moment we were
to receive a summons . I could see that Mr Septimus
was impatient for it . This afternoon , then , we climbed
a promontory , a mass of clean rock crowned with
trees and bushes , that stood well out over the lake .
NO ONE has ever satisfactorily explained how a
single-decker Welsh bus could have got
itself into orbit . Shooting up over the pass a bit
too carefree , and becoming airborne ?
Caught by a sudden gust of wind ? A
combination of the two ? No one seems
to know . But the fact remains that get
itself into orbit it did .
And a fine old fuss there was about it , too .
Here are the known facts . On 10th July ,
the bus , the 2.20 from Dinas to Llangrwl ,
left Dinas at two-thirty-five as usual .
Aboard , apart from the crew , were Mrs. Megan
and Miss Ethel Yates , hikers from
Birmingham ; Price the Provisions ; and the
Yes , the bus set out from Dinas . So much
is established . Ifor Huw Evans , Propr. ,
watched it go from the windows of the
Dinas Motor Omnibus Co. Very interested ,
Ifor was . For there was his garage hand ,
Dai Pugh , taking a tearful farewell of
Morfydd Owen . Morfydd , who had until
recently been Ifor's typist , but was now
returning to her home town as a
fully-fledged schoolteacher .
" But I 'm only going fifteen miles away , "
Morfydd was saying . " Not the end of
the world , is it ? " " For me it is , " Dai
said wretchedly , wiping his hands on his
overalls preparatory to a last embrace . " You
will not be remembering a mere garage
hand when you are lording it over
the Mixed Infants of Llangrwl . "
" Silly boy , " said Morfydd . Though she
could not help wondering whether , now she
had qualified as a schoolteacher , poor
little Dai was quite the man for her .
A nice boy of course . But perhaps in the
new world she was entering there might
to offer . The conductor rang his bell .
" Good-bye , Dai , " said Morfydd , smiling from the bottom step .
" Good-bye , Morfydd . " He sought to enfold her in his arms . But he was too late .
She was already up the bus steps , and the bus was away . And Morfydd Owen
waving , unkissed , from the window . And Dai , on the pavement , knowing in his
heart that Morfydd was leaving him as surely as she was leaving Dinas .
So the bus set out for Llangrwl . But it never reached there ! Somewhere ,
on those fifteen miles of mountain roads , it disappeared from the earthly
scene . The first intimation that all was not well came when a
Mr. Isaiah Roberts , landlord of The Traveller's Joy , rang up the
Dinas Motor Omnibus Co. to ask what had happened to their
" Left here all right , " said Ifor . " Two-thirty-five , on the dot . " " It 's
supposed to leave at two-twenty . " " Who says so ? " " Your timetable . "
" Don't want to take too much notice of those old timetables , " Ifor said ,
reasonably . " Start running punctual and where are you ? People get
left behind , isn't it ? Very exasperating for one and all . "
" And what are you going to do about it ? " Tendentious , Mr. Roberts sounded .
" What do you want me to do ? Send out a sheriff's posse , is it ? " No sense
of humour , that Isaiah . He banged down the receiver . Very uncivil . Dropped
the mask , now , Ifor did . " Dai Pugh , " he bellowed . " Leap on your bicycle
and scour the countryside between here and The Traveller's Joy .
The two-twenty to Llangrwl has failed to
complete her mission . " Paled , did Dai . For the
two-twenty carried , for him , a cargo more
precious than jewels . Though Mofydd Owen
was , as he feared , departed out of his life ,
he still loved her dearly . Already , even
as with trembling fingers he fastened his
trouser clips , he was seeing her lying in
some dreadful ravine , or beset by
robbers , or being whisked off to Emergency
But even his imagination , luckily for him ,
did not visualise the awful truth - that
Morfyyd Owen was already qualifying for
the title of " First Woman to Enter Space . "
" Where are we going , Mam ? " inquired little
Cadwallader when his child mind grasped
the fact that the green earth was falling
away at a rate of knots .
Where indeed ? Megan Thomas spoke sharply
to the conductor , demanding an explanation .
But nonplussed , the conductor was . A
good man , mind ; knew his job . But out of
depth in this particular instance . Fingered
his ticket-punch nervously . Peered out of
the window . Went and consulted the driver .
" Damned if I know , boy , " said the driver .
" But something very untoward has
happened , if you ask me . "
Immersed in the Dinas Advertiser , was the
Rev. Edwards . Now he put down his paper ,
folded it , and glanced idly out of the
window . Looked again , eyes starting from
his head . " God bless my immortal soul , "
he cried . " Never mind your immortal
soul , " said Megan Thomas tartly .
" Here we are traversing the heavens at the
very moment when we should be
running into Llangrwl bus station .
And no one doing the first thing about
it . " Stung , the conductor was . " What you
expect me to do ? " he inquired , bitter .
" Radio Flying Control at London Airport ,
is it ? " " Mutual recriminations will get
us nowhere , " boomed the Rev. Edwards .
" It 's all very well , " commented
Mr. Hayball from the back seat .
" But Eth and me wanted to be
at the Youth Hostel before dark . "
Morfydd Owen was silent . But she
looked down at the fast-disappearing
earth , and it seemed to her that she
would never see her Dai again . And
though half an hour ago she had
regarded this possibility with
fortitude , it now filled her with
dismay . Quietly she began to
Dai , meanwhile , was pedalling
furiously on the road . Not a sign of
the bus . He passed The Traveller's
Joy . At last he caught up Mr. Roberts ,
walking very dogged towards Llangrwl .
" Afternoon , Mr. Roberts , " he called , polite ,
as he shot past . His spirits were rising .
He had seen no sign of an accident .
He would find the bus safe and sound in
Llangrwl , and his dear Morfydd quietly
But disappointment awaited him . A
waiting to be transported to Dinas . And
when he went to Morfydd's house , all
he found was Morfydd's mam , working
herself up proper ... Getting dark , now .
The conductor switched on the lights .
The beleaguered passengers peered out of
the windows . Little to be seen , only a
few lone stars , and the distant earth
brooding in her shroud of mist .
Megan Thomas sat tight-lipped , nursing
the sleeping Cadwallader . Driver and
his Eth . Morfydd thought of Dai . The
Rev. Edwards , standing at the front ,
looked at his forlorn flock . " What
he suggested hopefully .
They looked at him , sullen . His heart
sank . If the Welsh found the situation
too desperate for singing , then the
situation , he realised , must be desperate
indeed . But suddenly they were roused
from their lethargy . Something was
approaching , faster , faster , a tearing
hurrying blur that was past and gone
in a moment , followed by a great
But the jet aircraft was already miles away ,
swinging down to the darkening earth . " It
passed me at fifty thousand feet , sir . It was
climbing steadily . " Group Captain Llewelyn Jones , Officer
Commanding R.A.F. Station , Dinas , looked keenly at the
Flying Officer who had burst so unceremoniously into his
office . " And what did it look like , Broughtons ? Some
Flying Officer Broughtons shuffled his feet .
" Well , actually , sir , it looked like - like a bus .
A single-decker , " he elaborated . Daggers , the
Group Captain looked . " Broughtons , " he said silkily .
" Didn't they teach you at Cranwell that buses are
earth-bound creatures ? Aeroplanes fly , Broughtons .
Buses crawl . " Very pale , Broughtons was . But
determined . " It was a bus , sir .
They 'd got the lights on . There were people inside .
Waving . " Like gimlets , the Station Commander's eyes .
" Did you see the indicator board ? " " Yes , sir . " " And
what did it say ? Mystery Tour ? " Oh , very caustic , that
Group Captain . But Broughtons stood his ground . " No ,
sir . It said Llangrwl . " Llewelyn Jones sat
back in his chair . " I see . So you met a bus at
All lit up . Full of people waving as you went past . "
Suddenly he crouched forward . " Broughtons , if I thought
there were anything in Queen's Regulations to cover this ,
I 'd have you court-martialled . But I know there
isn't , " he ended sadly . " I tried to read the
registration number , sir . But it was getting dark . "
He waited . But his commanding officer appeared to
He saluted , and left the presence , very crestfallen ...
Time passed . The bus climbed , and went quietly
into orbit . Time passed . The Rev. Edwards' pulpit
remained empty . And so did the arms of Dai
Pugh . How could they be otherwise , when his
beloved was circling the Poles at three-and-a-
quarter-hour intervals , regular as clockwork ?
Time passed . Everyone said , " Pity about Megan
Thomas , isn't it , " as though they didn't really think
it was a pity at all ; as , indeed , they didn't .
LOCAL BUS DISAPPEARS announced the
Dinas Advertiser . But the London papers ignored
the whole affair . Ifor Evans reported his loss
to the police . But they only tut-tutted . " Lost
a bus , is it . Very careless . " That was their
attitude . Now if there 'd been a good old accident ,
they could have measured up the road and
But losing a bus ! People were always losing
things . You 'd be surprised , they said . So it
seemed , for a time , that the whole affair would
be written off as one of those unexplained
mysteries , like the Marie Celeste . Then things
began to happen ... But what about the voyagers ?
Well , the Rev. Edwards had taken command . " Our
position , " he said , " is somewhat analogous to
that of a castaway on a desert island . Now
what does such a person do ? He signals
his position by lighting bonfires or hoisting a
flag on a palm tree . And he tries to ensure
" Can't go lighting bonfires on this bus , "
the conductor said firmly . " Contrary to the
Company's Regulations . " " Of course not , " agreed
the minister . " No , we have another way of signalling
our position . The driver must sound his horn
continuously . " Gave him a look , the driver did .
" Where you think we are ? " he asked rudely .
" Do as I say , driver . " Very stern , the reverend
gentleman was . So the driver peep-peeped as
through empty space . " Thank you , " the Rev.
Edwards said courteously . " Secondly , we must
pool and ration our supplies of food , if any . "
He looked at Price the Provisions , who was nursing
" Now , who has any food ? " he asked hopefully .
Stared back did Price the Provisions , unwinking .
" Mr. Price , I think you may be able to help us here , "
said the Rev. Edwards . Price shook his head .
" Intended for Plas Newydd , this lot is . Paid for ,
too . " He folded his arms protectively over the basket .
Mutinous dog , thought the Rev. Edwards , who hadn't
enjoyed himself so much since reading Treasure
Island . " What have you got in that basket , Price ? "
he roared . Quelled , Mr. Price pulled out a grocery
list , pushed his glasses up on his nose , and
began to read . " Six loaves , four pounds butter ,
two pounds marge , one tin pineapple , one York ham . "
" Then we are saved , " cried the Rev. Edwards .
Shyly , Morfydd Owen produced a block of
Though your wings and your scars are new ,
you may join us . ' ' I am Lily-yo . We three
are humans . You are only flymen . We will
not join you . ' The Captives grunted in boredom .
The Chief Captive spoke again . ' Always this
talk from you of the Heavy World ! You have
joined us . You are flymen , we are human . You
' But we - ' ' Stop your stupid talk , woman ! ' ' We are - '
' Be silent , woman , and listen , ' Band Appa Bondi said .
' We know much , ' repeated the Chief Captive . ' Some
things we will tell you . All who make the journey from
the Heavy World become changed . Some die . Most live
and grow wings . Between the worlds are many strong
rays , not seen or felt , which change our bodies .
When you come here , when you come to the True
World , you become a true human . The grub of the
tigerfly is not a tigerfly until it changes . So humans
change . ' ' I cannot know what he says , ' Haris said
stubbornly , throwing himself down . But Lily-yo and
' To this True World , as you call it , we come to die , '
Lily-yo said , doubtingly . The Captive with the
fleshless jaw said , ' The grub of the tigerfly thinks
it dies when it changes into a tigerfly . ' ' You are still
young , ' said the Chief Captive . ' You begin newly here .
Where are your souls ? ' Lily-yo and Flor looked at
each other . In their flight from the 4wiltmilt they had
heedlessly thrown down their souls .
Haris had trampled on his . It was unthinkable !
' You see . You needed them no more . You are still
young . You may be able to have babies . Some of those
babies may be born with wings . ' The Captive with
the boneless arms added , ' Some may be born wrong ,
as we are . Some may be born right . '
' You are too foul to live ! ' Haris growled . ' Why are
you not killed ? ' ' Because we know all things , ' the
Chief Captive said . Suddenly his second head roused
itself and declared , ' To be a good shape is not all
in life . To know is also good . Because we cannot move
well we can - think . This tribe of the True World
is good and knows these things .
So it lets us rule it . ' Flor and Lily-yo
muttered together . ' Do you say that you poor
Captives rule the True World ? ' Lily-yo asked
at last . ' We do . ' ' Then why are you captives ? '
The flyman with ear lobes and thumbs connected ,
making his perpetual little gesture of protest ,
' To rule is to serve , woman . Those who bear power
are slaves to it . Only an outcast is free . Because
we are Captives , we have the time to talk and
think and plan and know . Those who know
command the knives of others . ' ' No hurt will
come to you , Lily-yo , ' Band Appa Bondi added .
' You will live among us and enjoy your life free
' No ! ' the Chief Captive said with both mouths .
' Before she can enjoy , Lily-yo and her companion
Flor - this other man creature is plainly useless -
must help our great plan . ' ' The invasion ? ' Bondi
asked . ' What else ? Flor and Lily-yo , you arrive
here at a good time . Memories of the Heavy World
and its savage life are still fresh in you .
We need such memories . So we ask you to go
back there on a great plan we have . ' ' Go back ? '
gasped Flor . ' Yes . We plan to attack the Heavy
World . You must help to lead our force . ' The long
afternoon of eternity wore on , that long golden road
of an afternoon that would somewhere lead to
Motion there was , but motion without event - except
for those negligible events that seemed so large to
the creatures participating in them . For Lily-yo , Flor
and Haris there were many events . Chief of these was
that they learned to fly properly . The pains associated
with their wings soon died away as the wonderful
new flesh and tendon strengthened . To sail up in the
light gravity became an increasing delight - the ugly
flopping movements of flymen on the Heavy World
Alastair was a bachelor . All his life he had
been inclined to regard women as something
which must necessarily be subordinated to his
career . Now he realised that he was entrusting not only
his own life , but Geoffrey's as well , to a strange girl
whom he had never met and on whom after no more
than a couple of telephone calls he was
prepared to place complete reliance .
It was a novel experience . Alastair was
quite unable to explain why he should feel
so much confidence in her . Once again
she checked back her instructions . It was
was prepared to accept the responsibility .
be waiting for you at the Hotel Roma at six this
both at midnight . " They might have been
arranging a supper party . Then she rang off .
Alastair admitted that never in a not altogether
uneventful life had he come across a girl who
sounded so charming and appeared to be so
For some reason the orderlies had forgotten
to switch on the lights ; there was no colour -
physical features were distinguishable solely by
gradations of silvery greyness . Even the snow-
capped summit of Mont Blanc , seven miles
below , was not recognisable among the host
of lower peaks . The screen of the air-to-air
radar glowed . Occasionally minute spots
flickered across its surface , but there was
In the exceptional clarity he was even able to
make a direct comparison between the radar
image and the ground itself . Ahead lay the
Plain of Lombardy ; to the right , Turin ; to the
left , Milan . The directional angle of the
scanner could be adjusted to cover any
particular area within its range . Geoffrey
turned the scale slowly to cover the
ground immediately ahead .
He was able to pick out towns , unrecognisable to the
naked eye , obscured by the ground haze which even
on the clearest night limited angular vision . He glanced
at the speed recorder . It seemed almost incredible that
the tiny white figure of 8.5 against which the needle
was resting could really mean hundreds of knots .
Now , as Alastair reduced the thrust , the
pitch changed as the nose of the aircraft
dipped slightly . The needle of the speed
recorder swung gently through 8.0 , 7.0 , 6.0
before coming to rest at 5.0 . " We 're a bit
ahead of time , " said Alastair . " We 'll run
in on minimum engine power . " Geoffrey
smiled . Alastair talked of running in when
they were still more than four hundred
miles from their destination .
He was able to trace the course of the river ; he
along which he had motored so desperately little
by special helicopter from the Horse Guards
of the journey back to the place where every
indication pointed to Eve being held .
Geoffrey set himself to consider the
previous night . He worked out the distance
through Florence and Rome and then
It came to just over six hundred
DARKNESS had descended like a curtain by the
time they docked at Belleray . And though Guy ,
made nervous by Beryl's silence , drove at reckless
speed to the Villa , it was quickly evident that
the party was over . Piers came strolling out to
meet the Deanes , and as soon as Guy had
driven away , invited them casually to come to
To Beryl , at least , this was anti-climax with a
vengeance . She had expected to be met with violent
reproaches - and here he was bland and smiling .
But it did not take her long to realise that his mood
was less pleasant than appeared on the surface .
He told her nonchalantly , as he led the way to his
own veranda , that he had taken the liberty of
asking Jack - as a representative of the Vallin family -
to come over and make the presentation in her stead .
" I caught him just as he was going to the
airport to meet Blanche , " he said . " As a matter
of fact I 'd asked him last night to deputise
for me and fetch her . He brought her to the party
too . They 're both here . " " I didn't know she was
coming back from Barbados so soon . " Beryl
said the first thing that came into her head .
" Oh , she was due ! " And then he added in the same
casual tone , " She 's not returning to her family . She 's
going to live with friends of the bank manager , just
this side of Belleray . " Mrs. Deane made a suitable
comment , but Beryl said nothing . She was trying
to sort things out in her mind . That beneath his
unnaturally smooth exterior Piers was simmering
with anger against her she had no doubt .
Hubert would have betaken himself and his well-
It was all over and done with .
For the time being Beryl was content to let
it go at that , but she resolved to have
it out with Piers when a reasonable
opportunity presented itself . He must
learn that he could not treat her
with injustice and contempt , ignoring
her explanations as though he were
a schoolmaster and she a small ,
He gave her no chance of any private
conversation that evening , for when
Blanche and Jack left , he went with
them . But next morning she insisted
on his taking her out in the jeep -
to find , if possible , Hubert and his
relations , and tell them of
her great disappointment at being
held up in Balicou .
With an air of resignation he sent Judy , his
Boxer , to the back , and made room for her
beside him . " Is that all you want to do ? "
he asked , letting in the clutch . " No ; I want
to make you understand just what happened
about this Balicou trip , " she returned
coldly . " I 'm a little tired of being treated
like an ineffective imbecile . "
" And I 'm heartily sick of being constantly called
to account for my manners , " he retorted .
" What have I done wrong now ? I cover up for
you the best way I can by getting hold of Jack
to make the presentation , I run the damned
party to the best of my ability - saying the
sugary things you ought to have been there
to say - and all you can do is to find
" It 's your superior attitude that riles me . " Beryl was
scarlet with annoyance . " How I happened to be marooned
" As your employee it 's not my business
to understand all the whys and
wherefores of your actions , " he said
stiffly . " Still less to criticise you . "
" Oh , drop that nonsense , Piers !
Be yourself , " she exclaimed , with
mounting exasperation . " Very well ! " He
path fringed and shaded by citrus trees .
You made some sort of a protest to Graybury .
I 'll give you credit for that . But you didn't press
the matter because , very naturally , you were
thoroughly enjoying Forrest's company in
idyllic surroundings . " " How dare you say
such a thing ? " she blazed . " For goodness'
sake show a glimmer of reason , " was his
equally indignant rejoinder .
" You talk as though we were alone on Balicou ! "
She avoided his gaze , and tried to ignore that
last impertinent remark . " With four other people - "
" Whom you never once managed to circumvent . "
The mockery in his voice had deepened . " With
all due deference , Miss Deane - come off it ! "
She met his eyes then .
She wavered , and at last said
slowly , " If you must drag the truth
out of me , I must ask you to regard
it as confidential . " " My dear Beryl ,
don't tell me anything , if you 'd rather
not . " He was clearly startled by her
words . " But remember , it was you ,
not I , who started this conversation . "
Their air of smiling somnolence showed them
to have been guests at yesterday's
celebrations , and their friendly welcome
and warm sympathy , as she explained
how she had come to miss the party ,
made her send a complacent glance
in Piers' direction . What a fuss-box the
man was , she thought impatiently ,
trying to worry her into the belief
that her failure to appear at a function
on the estate was a major error :
And then she received a jolt . Old Hubert , standing
beside her , his battered hat in his hand , his
toothless mouth stretched in a wide grin , told her
in halting 6patois that " 3Mistah Piers " had
explained right at the start that " 3Mis' Beryl "
would be 3" plenty , plenty sad " not to be back
That it wouldn't be her fault at all . That
she was a lady who , like her Uncle Charles ,
took the highest pride in keeping her word . " I
could see 3anudder 3t'ing , " he went on in a
lower voice , his sunken black eyes twinkling .
3" He powerful anxious , poor Mistah Piers .
We all know how Balicou Island dangerous
to all kin' o' boats , wid d'ose big , big
rocks in an' out o' de water .
He had almost entirely settled back into his old
ways , even to reading law about two hours each
day . Though he did not refuse wine , which the
judge always had on the table at dinner , he
did not act as though he found it necessary
except in moderate compliance with his father's
Around that rounded rocky promontory where the
white spray could be seen flying across the distance
of a mile and a half , came the yawl under her full
close to the rocks that it would be dashed
against them with the lift of the next wave .
" That boy ! That damned fool boy ! What does he mean
by trying to come home now , even if he did promise ?
What does time mean when weighed against the life of
two human beings ? " Not until he was certain that the
yawl had rounded the rocky point instead of
being flung against the huge boulders did the judge
empty his lungs of stifling air and refill them
with part of that howling northwest gale .
When the wind was on a rampage , as it was
now , it could kick up a sea-sized commotion
where it had a straight blow of eight miles
down the lake . 3" Big blow , Judge , " re-
marked Willie Kim as the wind billowed
out and sucked in his baggy black
she blow some more . " " Hello , Willie , where
mild surprise . " I didn't hear you . Do you
the lake ? " 3" I see him . You don't need
Bill is good man , and Bueno Buck is raised on lake .
He no drown , too . Him , his mother throw him into
water to make him swim when he is born .
Maybe so Bill , he can swim that good , too . "
The yawl , riding the high waves with an air that
might have made an ocean liner envious , seemed
prepared to make a safe though violent landing
when there came a sudden gust of wind
" My God ! " the judge cried out . " The boy
is going to try to make a landing on the
weather side of that pier ! He 'll wreck ! "
black eyes showing any emotion . With a
jibbing the boom to which he had the
stay rope fastened , Bill made the
It seemed to the frightened judge
as though his son would actually
shoot the craft in under the outer
end of the wharf . But by pressing
the tiller hard over and at the
same time dropping the small sheet
of wet canvas , Bill cleared the
corner of the pier by inches , and
with the tiller still hard over , brought
the yawl up against the waves
" Willie , " the judge said huskily ,
hip as I ever saw . That boy of
mine seems to know how to do
everything , when he wants to . "
" 3Naw , " disputed Willie . 3" Just
play in damn fine luck this time .
He plenty smart though . " As they
reached the pier , the judge on legs
that were a little unsteady , they
found Bueno Buck , now on the
pier , leading the yawl toward
weren't worried . We 're going to
her over . She has a foot of
water in her . I wouldn't be
surprised if we broke all
speed records on the way in .
Yes sir , I am slightly wet , and
Buck would be wetter if he
had more clothes on . "
With four doing the job and the waves
pushing at the stern , the yawl was soon
dragged out but before it was turned
over Bueno Buck reached into the foot
of water , tossed out a string of silvery
lake trout and said - 3" Bill , he 's better
man at catch 'em than Injun , Judge .
You look . Little one more as fifteen
inches . Maybe big one four feet ,
exclaimed the judge . " Toss them on the grass
and then we 'll all get hold and heave . " A
down , exposing its shallow keel .
Bertram's face was grim . " You think it was the Snort ,
don't you ? " John gave a short laugh . " I did , " he
said ; " but I 'd better stop thinking that now .
Pericles is fitted with an identically similar one . "
" So there you are , my dear . " Peggy 's eyes filled
with tears . " It 's so unfair , " she said .
" That little beast Robbie Munyard spent six
months ashore while Pericles was refitting in the
dockyard and now that she 's ready for sea he goes
sick . Just because he 's an Honourable he can do
what he likes . Anyway , why pick on you to succeed
him ? " John didn't answer . There was no point
in sharing his discomfort with Peggy .
A submariner's wife needed to be spared as much
as possible . Anyway the Parsifal affair was far
too fresh in both their minds to be a comfortable
subject for discussion . " It 's a command , " he said .
We can do with the extra money . It 'll just about
pay Jacky's school fees . " " What shall we do
about this house ? - and Jill's school ? - and oh !
If I 'd known what it would be like I 'd sooner
have married a parson . " He kissed her . " Parsons
work on Sundays , " he said . " They 're worse off than
submariners . You ought to have married that fat
stockbroker chap and shared him with his three
mistresses . Anyway it might be much worse .
Pericles is a Portsmouth boat . She spends longer
in harbour than any other submarine .
Practically a shore job . Cheer up . " She wiped
her eyes and reached for her address book . " I 'll
write to those agents and try to get a flat in
Alverstoke , " she said . " But I don't know what
Jill will say about leaving her school . It 's a
blessing that Jacky 's off to boarding school .
And all the trouble you 've taken with the
That little beast , Robbie Munyard ! " Having
said her say Peggy manfully shouldered her
burden and prepared to break up yet
another home . In the ten years of married life
this had already happened half a dozen times .
Such is the life of a naval officer's wife .
John's father had been a naval officer of the old
school ; some of his rigid ideas had been passed
on to the second generation . One of these was that
an officer should join a ship , on taking up a
new appointment , at nine a.m. precisely , dressed
in the modern equivalent of frock-coat and sword .
It would have been acceptable to all concerned
if John had stepped into Fort Blockhouse clad in
plain-clothes on the previous night , but ways
instilled by martinet parents have a habit of
So he put up for the night at The Admiral's Head , that
famous Portsmouth hostelry , second only in historic
interest to The George , unhappily destroyed by German
bombs during the last war . Having deposited his
baggage and unpacked his overnight-bag he
went in search of a drink . The lower bar was
empty , save for the lady known by all habitue
man who was staring moodily into a gin
Seaweed's memory was prodigious ; her manner
must have been worth a great deal to the proprietors
of the hotel . She greeted John , however , with less
than her usual cordiality and flashed a warning
glance at him . Evidently the other occupant
of the bar was not 6persona grata . If her
memory was good , so was this stranger's .
" You 're Commander Winter , " he said . " Have a
gin ? " He turned to Seaweed -
" Make it a large one , darling . I know the naval
habits . ' Drink gin and call each other wallahs ,
what ! ' - as the Guards officer said on his return
from a visit to the Royal Navy . Submarines , what .
Youngest D.S.C. in the war , what ? Crawled
inside a submarine casing to defuse a Jerry
bomb . Should have been a V.C.
What are you waiting for , darling ? The officer is
obviously thirsty . " John fought back his
inherited desire to snub the man . If he did he
would have to leave the bar and either sit in
the lounge or return to his bedroom .
Seaweed sensed his embarrassment and
came to the rescue . " You haven't introduced
yourself , " she said with mock severity .
" It 's a rule on these premises . No treating with
strangers - that 's right , John , isn't it ? " " My
fault entirely , " said the stranger . " It 's my conceited
nature - I assumed that you both knew who I
was . I 'm Ian Bawley . Does that mean anything
to you ? " It did . Ian Bawley's name was
printed at the head of most naval articles
" Oh , the Press , " said Seaweed . " Down here on business , Mr.
Bawley ? " " A pressman is always on the job . "
He held out his hand and John could not do
otherwise than take it . " Pleased to meet you ,
Commander , " he said . " Now what about that
drink ? " John nodded - he could afford to buy
one in return and he was lonely .
" For the sake of accuracy , " he said , " and I
know how you newspaper people value that commodity ! -
please don't address me as Commander . I 'm
a Lieutenant-Commander . Perhaps we could
drop the rank - such a mouthful ! " " You 're
absolutely right , " said Bawley , as he pushed over
his glass . " Fill it up , darling . Accuracy above
all else . We pride ourselves about accuracy on
Ever known us bowl a wide about your Service ?
Check and counter-check - nothing but the truth .
Somewhat embarrassing , what ? " " How can the
truth be embarrassing ? " John sipped his double
gin with relish . It was his favourite brand ,
he was on the verge of a new chapter in
his career , and his companion's attitude was
Life at home and in Bath had been a
trifle too comfortable and humdrum .
He 'd never before met a pressman and
found him curiously stimulating . " You 're a
bit of a humorist , aren't you ? " said
Bawley . " The truth is usually very embarra-
ssing . You 're in submarines , aren't you ? "
" You know a great deal about me , "
" It 's my business . I 'll tell you more . You 're
going to take over command of Pericles . Am I
right ? " " Who told you ? " " Little bird .
Other half ? " John nodded . " On me . " Bawley
shook his head . " All paid for by His Lordship , "
he said . " Expense account . You 're a married
man with a couple of kids . Can't go wasting
your substance on a complete stranger . Set
John flushed . " I 'm not in need of charity . " " Come
off it , " said Bawley . " The proprietor of the Daily
Courier knows what 's going on . If he doesn't mind ,
why should you ? " " I see . " John took the
companion . " You want me to talk , is that it ? "
" You misjudge me , " said Bawley . " You have
nothing to tell me , yet . But we 'll be meeting
have dinner with me ? On His Lordship ,
" Tell me who the little bird was . " " Can't
" You mean Munyard ? " " Sure . Very useful
contact , is our Robbie ; he gives us the gen and
we give him the publicity . ' The Honourable
" Robbie " and friend ' , what ? You know the
tell George to bring in the 6carte du jour . "
host and a splendid raconteur . The evening
passed all too quickly . As they parted in
the vestibule the two men were well
disposed towards each other .
" Ever been to Fleet Street ? " asked Bawley .
take you round the pubs where most
of the work is done . " He held out a card .
John took it and put it in his pocket .
" Thanks , " he said . " If ever my missus
lets me off the chain I 'll take you
Ever been out in a submarine ? I 'll give
you a spin round one of these days , if you
like . You could write it up . " Bawley made a face .
" Not in Pericles , old man . " " Why not ? "
" Better ask Robbie Munyard . " " What 's he been
saying ? " John was furious . The little squirt !
To go gassing to a newspaper man !
" Look ! " he went on earnestly . " You 're not going
to write up Pericles in some way or other , are
you ? " " What is there to write up ? " said
Bawley . " There are forty-three submarines in
the Navy - why should I pick on Pericles ? "
John eyed him steadily . " It 's the Parcifal
business , isn't it ? " he said quietly .
" I don't want it to happen again , " said Bawley -
" more so than ever since I met you . "
" What did Munyard say ? " " The Snort - hull
fitting fractured . " " Supposing I was to tell you that
we 've had Pericles' entire Snort equipment removed
and X-rayed and that it was as sound as a bell ? "
" Munyard didn't tell me that . But I must confess
I 'm relieved . But it still doesn't do away
with the possibility of faulty design . " He held
out his hand . " Maybe I will take a trip with you
one of these days , " he said . " In the meantime
I 'll tell my editor that the story 's a dead bird .
Glad I met you . Don't forget to give me a ring -
any time - knock twice and ask for Bawley , what ? "
" I don't know when that will be , " said John .
" I shall be busy for a while , cleaning up after
Master bloody Munyard . " THERE were six submarines ,
lying in pairs alongside the jetty at Fort Blockhouse .
Black and grimly businesslike they both looked and
sounded , for all of them were rumbling as they
charged their electric batteries .
A light wind wafted the smoke of diesel exhaust in
through the open windows of the Captain's house . It
pervaded every room but neither Harry nor Madeleine
Turton noticed its existence as they sat in silence over
a substantial breakfast . Although usually a very
talkative lady Madeleine respected her husband's
silences , for she knew they betokened a worry of
There had been many such breakfasts lately since the
affair of Parsifal . Harry had lost a good deal of weight .
His normal placid and steady-going manner remained ,
but she could see that it no longer came naturally .
It is the common lot of all Squadron Senior Officers
to experience such catastrophes as the loss of a submarine ,
though in peace time these happenings are few and
This is the testing time for all . The affair blows up into
a national disaster and then when it is all over life
must continue as before . During this period the Captain
must present an unruffled appearance and carry on as
if nothing unusual has happened . Harry Turton had
written letters to the bereaved , had visited many in the
locality , had been interviewed by the Press , had driven
his surviving submarines a good deal harder than
usual and in fact had applied all the usual specifics
He rode down to where I was waiting . I was
thinking what a skill he had for reading
my mind . " This would be as good a place
for a hold-up as any , " he said , reining in
near me . " Yes , " I said . " It 'll be here to-
morrow as likely as not . " I paused . " Miss
Jeannie 'll be on that coach , Dan . "
" Yes , " he said . " I know . " " No harm must come
to her , Dan . " " She 'll be all right . It 's the
men who 'll be after that coach I 'm interested
in , Johnny . " " I know . But if lead starts
flying she might be in danger . " " That 's so .
But I reckon they 'll be too busy shooting at
us to bother with the coach and the folks
" Maybe , " I said . " But we 've got to remember
that girl all the time , Dan . I feel kind
of responsible for her . " " Of course , " he said ,
giving me one of his strange looks . Then he
turned the conversation . " Let 's ride over
and have a look at the mining camp .
After all it 's them we 're supposed to be
working for , as well as the townsfolk and
With something of a start I remembered the
man who 'd brought us into this business .
" Maybe you don't know about Appleton ,
Dan ? " " Know what ? " " That he 's dead , "
I said . I watched him because I was always
fascinated by the way he looked when you
tried to surprise him . " Dead ? " he said . " Yes .
Dead . Shuffled out of the deck . Blasted
down with a shotgun outside the Palace
" Fenton or Somers , " he said . " Or the Town
Marshal , " I added . His face was fixed ,
unreadable as a rock . " Let 's get over to the
mining camp , " he said abruptly . He wheeled
his horse back off the trail and up the slope
leading to the ridge . I followed . From the
top you could see something of the wild hill
country that lay all round Gilburg Crossing .
The air was fresh and clear and you
could see far over west and north for many
miles . The real high country of the Rockies
lifted up in the distance like a pale water-
colour drawing . Between us and that lay
a vast stretch of hills , canyons , buttes and
" The mine-workings lie north of the town , "
said Dan . " If we head west we ought to
cut the trail leading from Gilburg to the north . "
So we swung west , making slow going over
rough country , sliding on shale , climbing down
into draws , circling a big mesa by a
four or five mile valley , sandy-floored . It
got hotter as the day wore on and we rested
gratefully by a small creek where we watered
the horses and drank enough to cure our
An hour's riding brought us to a trail that
we figured would lead to the miners' camp .
We turned north into it and after about four
miles it led into a small canyon which
opened out into a wide shallow draw .
Here in a dried-up creek-bed we found
the miners at work . They were scattered
over a fairly wide area working singly or
We didn't approach unchallenged . Just short
of the diggings there was a roughly-built
shack and as we got near someone inside bawled
out , " If you come any closer , I 'll sure blow
your whiskers off . " " Take it easy , mister , " I sang
out . " We don't aim to come any closer and we 've
got no whiskers so as you can see . Just you
go and tell Nick Dowd we 've come to talk
to him about what happened last night . "
" Oh , " said the unseen guard . He blew a
whistle then , loud and shrill . The gun barrel
peeking out through a hole in the shack never
wavered . We sat our horses , waiting . " Looks as
though they 're expecting trouble , " I said . " Where
there 's gold and women there 's always trouble , "
observed Dan , shifting about in his saddle . He
I saw several men running down towards
the shack . They were all armed with rifles .
As the nearest of them came round the
shack , his rifle at the ready , I saw it was Nick
Dowd , still wearing his blue check shirt . He
came up close , eyeing us suspiciously . " We 've
come 2a-calling , " I said . " Can't see no reason
for calling , " he said . " Still long as you 're here
you may as well stay a while .
'Light an' come on in . " We dismounted and
one of the miners who 'd come along with
Nick Dowd took our horses off to water .
We followed Nick Dowd into the shack .
They 'd rigged up a stove of sorts and on it
a huge blackened coffee-pot steamed . Other
miners followed in at our heels . Nick Dowd
found us a couple of boxes to sit on .
A small man in bib overalls and a battered
Derby hat fussed around the stove . " 2Ain't
exactly the Ritz Hotel but we 've got our little
comforts , " said Dowd . He introduced the men
who 'd come in as Roper Smith , Shorty , Mick
Golightly , Swede and the Sodbuster . This last was
the little hombre in big overalls . Very soon he
had tin mugs filled with hot black coffee
sweetened with molasses for all and for us
there were two plates of beans .
" They gives you the wind , " said the Sodbuster
handing them to us , " but it 's all we got
as of now , apart from a few sacks of gold
dust . " He winked at his partners . They all
watched us as we ate the beans . Then when
we 'd finished and I 'd rolled a cigarette
the man called Shorty said , " You were saying when
you came in that 2somep'n happened last
" Yes , " I said . " Something happened all right .
After you 'd left the meeting , mister " - I
looked across at Nick Dowd - " someone cut
down William Appleton outside the Palace
with a shotgun . " I paused and watched my
words affect them in their different ways .
" That 's sure bad news , " said Dowd , sombrely .
" It 2jest about leaves everything wide open
for Mr. Pell and his bunch , " observed
The rest of the men there said nothing but
you could see they were hard hit . They were
simple men who knew a lot maybe about
digging for gold but were babes in arms
when it came to dealing with owlhooters and
desperadoes like Pell and Fenton and the
rest . " I guess we 'd better hold onto the gold
right 2hyar , Nick , " said the Sodbuster .
" Yeah , " said Dowd dubiously . " 2Mebbe we 'd
better . " Surprisingly Dan Maffrey came in at
that point . " If you do , " he said , " you 'll be
sure asking for trouble . They 'll be on your
necks before you can say ' knife ' . It wouldn't
be the first time they 've held up a diggings
at gun point either . They 've done it before
and got away with it . "
" You 're 2durned tootin' , mister , " said the man
called Roper Smith . " We 've got five rifles among
us and a few six-shooters . But most of us
2ain't 2eddicated in shootin' . It 'd be a
2massacree , 2yessir . " " If you 'll take a chance
on getting your gold to the bank , then we 'll
abide by what we said at the meeting , "
said Dan . " We 'll watch the stage out of reach . "
I couldn't quite see how all this fitted in
with Dan Maffrey's aim to avenge himself
on the Fenton bunch but still it was a
handsome offer so I chimed in too . " That
goes for me , gentlemen , " I said . " If they do try
and hold up the stage , it 'll be a couple or
three of them , no more . I reckon we can deal
Mr. Copthorne knew a way round by the side
of the church where there was a small open
outbuilding where the grave digger kept his spades
and forks and tidying up implements . It might
be open . It was . He entered , and seated himself
in a huddle upon an upturned wheelbarrow .
His curious headgear fell off . Strange things
were going on in his bewildered brain . When
a man was drowning and towards his last
gasp it was scientifically supposed his whole
life came up before him in some cinematic
Mr. Copthorne was on dry land in a church
outbuilding , but this was happening to him now . He
saw himself as a sulky , ugly , malformed , repressed
boy , then a young youth . He saw himself refusing
baptism according to the sect his parents belonged to .
Walking out of the chapel later on . Continuing
on , his leaping mind flashed pictures of chi-
canery and corruption , the growth of the dea-
dly decadence and absorption in debase-
ment and Satanic debauchery .
He didn't know what to make of it , but it
was Mr. Copthorne all right . Perhaps he had
been attending some kind of fancy dress do
in London . Very strange his eyes looked . Mad ,
hunted eyes , as if the poor fellow had rocks in
his head , so the verger described afterwards .
" You 're very early about , sir , " he said , trying to
" Yes . I travelled down from London
as the dawn was breaking , and
the thought came to me I 'd like
to take a look at the church . I 've
windows , sir , they date back to
the fourteenth century . "
There were few passengers on the plane and Gavin was
quickly through the customs . " Gay ! " " Gavin ! " The girl
and her luggage had disappeared and they were alone
together . The porter brought Gavin's bag out to the
taxi . " Just a moment , darling , " Gavin pressed her
hand and smiled . " I want to check up on the
Gay went out to the waiting
taxi , and then found that in
the excitement of meeting
Gavin she had left her sun-
glasses on the veranda . She
went quickly back to fetch them .
Gavin and the girl who had got
off the plane with him were talking .
He was writing something in his
pocket-book , with a sick feeling
Gay , sitting opposite Gavin on the terrace could
hardly believe that she was the same girl ,
miserable , shy , who had sat at the little
table for the first time a few days ago .
Gavin raised his glass to her and smiled
and Gay's heart turned over . " I 'd like
to do that . " Gavin drained his glass
" And then we 'll go for a stroll along the
He gestured towards the bay where the full
moon was just rising over the rocks , then
laid his hand on hers . Gay smiled at him
again , happy beyond belief , knowing that
now Gavin was in love with her and her
only , yet remembering for a second the
kisses she had seen him giving Elaine .
All that was part of the past , she would put it behind her . She
would never be jealous again , would even take Larry's advice and
look the other way if need be . " I say ! " Gavin was looking over her
shoulder . " That 's a pretty girl ! " Gay glanced behind her , " Isn't she
lovely , she 's French , a very well known model I believe .
Gay , a little puzzled , went through
to the bar . Doc and Lilyan were
sitting just inside having coffee .
" Come and join us and bring your
boy friend , " Doc called . " No , Doc ! "
Lilyan remonstrated . " They want to be
alone . " " I 've booked a table at the
tonight so come and join us if you
can't find a table for two . "
Gay thanked him and walked out on to
the terrace thinking that perhaps Gavin
had bought a drink and taken it outside .
She looked round scanning the tables ,
then caught her breath , a cold hand
seeming to clutch her heart . Gavin was
seated at a small table in a shadowy
corner talking animatedly to Simone .
As Gay watched he offered the girl a
cigarette and lit it , his hands cupping
hers in an intimate way .
Gay stood irresolute for a moment , half
decided to go back and join Lilyan and
Doc , while she wanted to do no more than
run upstairs to her room , knowing that
Gavin although he had told her that he
loved her , was already flirting with a girl
that he had only met a few minutes before .
Larry's advice flashed through her mind ,
but she turned away , giving a little
gesture of hopelessness , knowing that her
The others were all dancing and
as Gay drew out a chair and sat
down Gavin , without a word , swept
Simone on to the floor . " It doesn't mean
anything , " Gay told herself desperately ,
trying to understand Gavin's point of
view and remembering the advice
that Larry had given her , while she
felt wretched beyond words .
His behaviour was not only boorish and in the worst of
taste but it was unkind beyond words . She fumbled
with the cigarette packet which lay on the table
not wanting to smoke but needing some action
to help her control her feelings . " Come and
dance , " Doc's cheery voice came as a
lifeline and Gay got up quickly , mana-
As he swung her on to the floor Gay saw Gavin
and Simone go through the doorway that led
down to the beach . Gay closed her eyes for a
moment in disgust . She was fully aware that Gavin
would make love to the French girl on the sands ,
and no doubt he would come back soon and
after Simone had left expect her to accept his
kisses on the way back to the hotel .
Sentence Database P02-109
heart out over ? " Doc nodded towards the door . " You
may consider him a man , I would say he was a
mentally adolescent cad . " " Oh , Doc ... " Gay protested
weakly , " you don't know Gavin . " " I 've only met him
today but I think I can safely say that I know
him a great deal better than you do . "
Doc gave her hand a shake . " Wake up
Gay , and don't even contemplate throwing
yourself away on a chap like that . You 're a
fine girl , intelligent , and pretty , and I had
thought you were sensible too . Don't
make a fool of yourself over someone
who doesn't care two jots for your feelings .
If he behaves like this now what is your
married life going to be like ?
Hell . " Doc answered for her . " Just Hell . Never able to
trust him out of your sight and having to put on
a brave face and pretend that you don't mind
whenever he flirts with another woman . He will
you know , always , and you aren't the type
who is tough enough to change him . "
Gay nodded . " I know that you 're right Doc , I think
now that I do realise that , and in any case , " she added
a little sadly , " if I did change Gavin , he wouldn't
be the same , if you know what I mean . " " You sound
like Alice in Wonderland , " Doc gently mocked her , " and
I 'm glad you 're beginning to see that you 're wasting
Now let him go and you won't have to wait
long for the right man for you to come
along . If I was thirty years younger and weren't
married to the sweetest wife in the world
I 'd marry you myself . " Gay laughed , Doc was
so kind and nice and she hoped that one
day she would be able to see the situation
as it obviously appeared to everyone else .
Doc asked Lilyan to dance and once
again Gay found herself alone at the table
feeling self-conscious and awkward , sure that
people were talking about the way Gavin
was behaving since they had seen them
dining together . She opened her bag
to get out her compact and saw Grace's
letter . She drew it out and opened it ,
glad to be able to occupy herself .
" So glad that you are having such a lovely time , dearie , "
it ran . " Your cards are lovely . I rang up Miss Harland
and have been over to sit with her father and do what
I can for him so that she can get out to do her shopping .
He 's getting on well but is pretty helpless still with his
No other news except that Elaine is engaged
and going to marry a foreigner ... "
Gay read the rest of the letter then put
Gavin had come back to her .
rather a sense of relief now that she
knew why Gavin had come to see
Because she was second best . The others came back
to the table , all of them making a fuss of her and at once
she felt happier . Gay loved them for their warm sympathy ,
" That is a pretty dress , " Lilyan commented , obviously sensing
Gay's distress and in a way that Doc , as a man , could not
understand , knowing that Gay was as much ashamed
for Gavin at the way he was behaving as she
" I made it myself , " Gay tried to speak
Diana Wills often sat on the brand
new seat outside the hospital
gates and thought vagrant
thoughts . At one time she had
the roundabout , which was
out of operation - in theory , at
least . She would think of her-
" If I were a tramp I would simply blow a
feather , " she decided , rather envying the gentle-
man of the road his freedom of decision , and
wishing life would sometimes allow serious-minded
women doctors to blow a feather and follow its
airy directions accordingly . " If I were needing a
job I 'd go to London , of course , " she went on .
" There are all sorts of wonder-
ful jobs in London and I could
take my pick , whereas in Yarmouth
one has to know something about fishing
and in Liverpool they 'd want sea-farers .
I don't think I 'd go to Edinburgh un-
less I was a Scot and wanting to get
home , or perhaps a student studying to
be a doctor , and I already know
She was engaged to Nigel , had been for two years .
Sometimes they talked on the theme of " when we get married " ,
and then all was wonderful , and perhaps it had only been
a slip of the tongue when Nigel had said , only last
evening , " If we get married , old girl , you 'll have to stop
She couldn't remember what they had been talking about or
word shouted into her very soul a horn of warning , and
with it was coupled a disembodied fragment of information ,
which now took on an ominous significance : Nigel had been
seen in Farlingham on an occasion he had sworn he had
been standing in for Luke Parsons at his surgery in
Now Nigel had every right to go where he
when she was not free ; this much they had
conceded one to the other . They rarely
found they were off duty together , and
the situation would have been intolerable
had there not been some give and take
about their relationship . So when Nigel
had told her about taking Luke's
evening surgery she had said ,
" Bless you ! I hope Luke is suitably grateful , darling . " " Oh , well , "
he shrugged diffidently , " I like the work . One gets plenty
of variety and it 's a change . " Nigel was the hospital's
Junior Medical Officer . " You won't be free about nine , I
suppose , to meet me for supper somewhere ? " she had
" Hardly likely , my sweet . Luke's surgery goes on for
hours . If they get in before eight-thirty , even
though they 're standing on one another's toes ,
I 've got to see 'em . If I am free , though ,
I 'll give you a ring , O.K. ? " O.K. , " she had
replied readily . So how could Nigel have
been at the Load of Trouble roadhouse ,
dancing with a blonde at eight-thirty that
" No , " she told Phil Gubbins , a junior
houseman , " it wasn't Nigel you saw ,
my lad . " " It was Nigel's car , anyway .
NUF 121 . " " He probably loaned his car
to somebody , Phil . He 's always doing that . "
Young Gubbins shrugged . " I didn't see his
face , Di , but it certainly looked like
Nigel from the back . D.j. and all .
Of course such as I couldn't afford
to go into the Load of Trouble . "
" Neither can Nigel , " smiled Diana .
" He 's saving up to get married . Remember ? "
" I remember , " quipped the houseman ,
meaning no offence , " but does he ?
That blonde was something . " " Anybody
I know ? " she smiled . " I think so .
I got a good look at her . But if Nigel
wasn't there it isn't important , is it ? "
" No , " Di said immediately . " It isn't at
But after that slight slip of the tongue on Nigel's part she had
realised it was important enough for her to have remembered , and it
was as though a red mist veiled her usually clear sight and
made her think there was an abyss immediately ahead .
" Nigel , " she had besought him , " you know that evening
you took Luke Parson's surgery and there was a woman
with a cyst on her ear ... ? "
" 5Ye-es ? " he lowered his eyes and kissed her on the
mouth , an act of devotion he didn't over-indulge .
" What about it , my sweet ? " " Well , " she laughed
suddenly in an upsurging of relief , " that stupid
Gubbins boy thought he saw you at the Load of Trouble .
With a blonde , too . Imagine ! " Nigel was frowning . He
looked distinguished when he frowned ; boyishly
" Gubbins ? Gubbins ? " he fretted . " Who 's he ? "
Though Diana knew the name of every
member of the staff , distinguished or not ,
Nigel often had to think hard to sort
he now demanded . " What was he
doing at the Load of Trouble ? "
" Oh , he wasn't . His motor-bike had
broken down outside and he noticed
your car and then you dancing with
this blonde . " " Really ? " Nigel cocked
one eyebrow . " Actually she was brunette
at the roots and I had a redhead on
the other arm . He would have told
you this , too ? " " No , " she laughed .
" He didn't actually see you . Because
it was your car I suppose he
presumed it was you , all dressed up in
" My white or my black ? " Nigel enquired .
" Now I wonder which I wore at that
particular surgery ? " " You are a fool ,
darling , " Di said happily . " I shall take
great pleasure in telling that young man
exactly what you were doing that
evening . " " No , don't , " he said , after
kissing her again . " I rather like to have
the housemen think of me as a
I 'm such a dull fellow , really . " " Dull ? " She
couldn't believe it . Self-deprecation
was not one of Nigel's usual attributes .
" You need your holiday , darling . I only
wish I could go with you ! " " Doctor
I suppose ? " she enquired archly .
" No , it wouldn't ! " he almost snapped ,
surprising her . " You sounded like some-
body else for a moment there . It doesn't
become you to behave like a - a tart , Di . "
" Nigel - ! " she gasped . " I didn't mean to
behave like anything of the kind . I
was only joking . " " Well , don't . It 's
miserable enough my having to take my
leave in the autumn without you
trying to be bright and gay about it .
I 'm going with a shooting party . What else can I do
at this time of year ? I can't ask you up because it 's
a strictly stag affair . " " I know . I didn't expect ... " " Well ,
don't keep hinting , then . You wish you could
come with me ; you hope I 'll miss you ; you
can't imagine the hospital without me for
three weeks , etcetera , etcetera ! "
Her figure was small and exquisite , like a schoolgirl's still , and
he admired her legs , which the male sex were inclined to
regard first . " I would mind if you didn't " he told her
grimly , and tugged her fiercely into his arms . " You 're
right , pet . I do need this leave . I 'm bad-tempered and
broody and going out with brash blondes . I don't deserve
" Darling ! " her voiced caressed him . " Moments like this
make all the waiting worth while . When we 're
married we won't have these explosions of emotion ,
will we ? " " No , " he eyed her strangely . " I wish we
were married , Di . Like a patient wishes his operation
was over . " Again her laughter trilled . " Marriage
isn't as bad as an operation , Nigel ! "
" Isn't it ? " he rose and smoothed himself
down . " Ask any bridegroom-to-be . Anyhow ,
that particular problem isn't looming at
the moment , thank God ! " Problem ... ?
looming ... ? " Are we discussing a marriage
or a burial ? " she asked , hardly believing
he could be serious . " Surely marrying
me isn't going to be all that bad ?
If it is - " she laughed uncertainly - " you can have
your ring back . " She loosened the half-hoop of
diamonds on her left hand third finger and held it
out to him , still playfully . Without a glimmer
of amusement in his own eyes , however , he took
it , looking moodily beyond her . " Perhaps it 's as
well if you don't wear it for a bit , Di , " he
" But I want it ! " she protested . " It 's my ring . "
" You just gave it back to me . " " I
didn't ! I was joking . You know I was
joking , Nigel . " " You shouldn't joke
about serious things like engagements . "
to have an open quarrel
any minute , and she knew it .
Almost in desperation she appealed , " Will you meet
me at the gate , four o'clock tomorrow ? " " Why ? " he
enquired , combing his thick , tawny hair . " To bring
me up for tea , of course . I just thought . " " I 'll see , "
which really hurt . " Without your ring it 's just like
and kissed her again , somewhat startled to
receive a sharp slap for his pains .
" If I were somebody else's girl that 's
what you 'd get , " she flashed at him , and
so had left him , on her dignity and not
decided with a sigh of satisfaction , and
with some bitterness .
Thus had they parted the previous evening and now
Diana was trailing up the gravelled drive to the hospital
alone . Of course one couldn't say for certain when a
doctor would be free during the day ; tea was served
from four until five-thirty in the residents' common-
room , which proved the elasticity of medical commitments .
Something had cropped up which required Nigel's attention ,
she was convinced , or he would have granted her small request
Sentence Database P03-189
They often had such a rendezvous , for
there was just time to smoke a cigarette ,
if one walked slowly , between road and
words . ' I wonder you dared trust
' Well ! At least I know the truth .
masterfully . ' You wanted it so
vulsion that was homicidal .
Even in that , his hands were
tied . He dare not precipitate
mantle , and said with such
' I will leave you the necessary pre-
will contact your new doctor
when you reach your parents'
his # prescription pad , and
# scribble on it . Then ,
he tore off the leaflet and
with a deadly finality . Watching
him . She couldn't hate him ...
fided in her , given some expla-
nation . Now there was no-
She went back to Philip . But
words : ' I love you - oh , you
the word . Nicholas , Philip ...
He needed her . She would find
She had her truth . How much had built
up from that first ideal , and how
given her . ' I 'm sorry , darling . '
said instinctively : ' I told him
I knew he was responsible for
' Good heavens , darling , why on earth
no matter how one might want to
disbelieve the facts . ' Elation
touched him after the cold wind
to see what comes out at the inquest .
What his story will be . I reckon
he 'll confine himself to the nervous
origin of her recent illness . His notes
will be truthful , but what he leaves out
will matter most . ' Strange how just
Sandra too deeply to ruin her
He was better ; he had made a
soon be his wife . The Devil , he thought ,
certainly looked after his own .
can you ? ' ' Forgive is an unctuous ,
the deceit . The lies . '
so well have the existing prisons succeeded at 
property as well as person of the offender being out of 
while 
 " those companions who had been the causes of their transporta- 
you intended to strike him in the fore-arm in such manner 
be such to whom notification can be made :  Beings that have ideas :  
entirely cut off. 
Would this be the case , if mere pestilence without famine were the 
brain. 
guilt
a  " long confinement "  in illegally and purposely crowded
be as follows .
several Gaols of the respective Counties cannot contain, 
when the Habit is taken into the Account the one practice 
"some run-away convicts who were known to be among them at 
"would engage to furnish the public store either at Sydney, Parra- 
Mischief 
Here the Law simply & absolutely
no evidence is receivable, that was not exhibited 
intitled as aforesaid . Provided also that if in respect thereof any 
of all those three other pieces or parcels of Meadow 
are introductory. 
-mium for every prisoner kept alive  :  paying for every one 
though mitigated seclusion, in small assorted com- 
meaning , as before , the place where he is to have justice 
 " persons from this settlement without the Governor ' s permission ; 
in in masses at the beginning of a period and professional &c 
bedding, competent to their situation, and in a state 
between interest and duty the want of which has been the 
the circumstances at his leisure could or could not have 
in a conquering state
[their Successors the other by the person or persons so seized and 
and Westminster . 
covenants , and agreements , as shall be requisite to enforce the 
that name of unfounded reprobation marked out for
period it will be found in calculation that on equal annual 
of a genuine one. To establish these genuine ones for every pur: 
been given of such readiness on the part of the said Jeremy 
continued respectively in arrear . 
:tioned should be accompanied with some details respecting their 
to give the Law without the Equity which controls it ,
-quences; when not so much, inadequately; when more, 
in this point of view worth mentioning  :  it 
cleanliness scarce any where conjoined with liberty. 
If not , a summons to come  ( meaning from whatever place 
ideas excited by assignable real entities that is at
The Decisions of Jurisprudence as applied to
roods and fourteen perches , be the same more or 
that jurisdiction , may be necessary in order to compel his 
-dequate  to each man's desires. 
heedlessness is to a want of consciousness . See Excuses 1 .
upon 
Accordingly if you think you observe any person giving 
offender under sentence of death but reprieved during pleasure 
shall remain and continue in such legal representatives or 
-day Schools , to return its inhabitants into the 
to them from among those Objects are apt to be
her be twice as great as he would be compelled to make were
such thing, about the return of Convicts, would have been 
person of the Governor , is declared to be one of the 
peaceable possession of the piece of ground aforesaid , at his own expence 
together with interest at the rate of five per cent per annum 
new spot than it used to be from the old spots, to which this 
the whole insomuch that the said Jeremy Bentham 
their Improvidence , similar in the Kind , and not
 ( B ) 
deprive him of his thigh or the whole of his arm the act 
Punishment
dictated either by what I call justice (in which case it would 
Decisions of internal Sense concerning Pain &
THEFT .
reduction shall constitute the supplemental allowance to which 
Art.8. Each prisoner shall be kept properly clo thed, 
Bentham and his Representatives. No reason was 
in the course of the original examination. 
5.th To keep constantly from them, in conformity to the 
injustice. On the former supposition, arrangements would have been 
Of Culpable Insolvency
See Laws concerning the several Trades relative to the several sorts of Provisions. 
Mr . B ' s . representatives , with power for them 
to [apply] for such information: an active way and a passive: by 
33 .
Bentham  :  such payments to be made clear of all deductions , 
therefore with the importance of the end , he would 
an Article of so small a value as the Copper Coin should be 
been once paid for any such supernumerary  , shall not be paid for 
To instance at once the strongest Case that 
This faith, his hope, his charity, do they not all 
 " difficulty , as it was understood that a clause was to be 
Whereas in and by the Statute passed on the seventh 
Letter 3d
Articles of Agreement had , made , concluded & agreed 
 + 
considering the usual and almost unavoidable dif-
that for two years only. 
7. To 
term by themselves respectively or their sufficient 
How little soever it seems to have been
Estate of such Survivor as aforesaid , untill due satisfaction 
as follows_ 
either of two ways, by usurping advantages that do not 
for them :  but in the mean time a temporary provision 
5th. To keep constantly from them, in conformity to 
In the former Case , it will be either kept 
said Robert Moseley and Elizabeth Wood ; and also 
preliminary offences, the better chance there is of effecting 
have been expected from solitude. 
II 
adhered
Chapel fit for the use of such Convicts Officers and Subordinates 
case is that the damage he would suffer from the loss of a 
industrious and well disposed become a continual prey to the 
convicted of transportable and other Crimes. 
Art . 14 . 
veto, when they are pleased to pronounce it, is so 
(E) Farther 
however, extends itself to all states the members of which 
Aggravation 1 .
Questions to the Jury would therefore have no Use; and 
they mistook an exception to a general rule , for the 
Provisions for Settling Disputes .
but have been properly administered. In any case let 
interest at the rate of 5 per Cent from the day of the delivery of such 
 : flowered or was of evil fame for Chastity .
or a twentieth part of that expence . So peremptory 
Show him how right and wrong depend upon existing 
and in ever part thereof be sufficiently warmed & 
Of State-Tumults. 
all Countries , to give him a right to put it to the test at his 
indulged! The seeds of the vexations which had so disappointed 
under the powers of the said Act from time to time appoint 
(a) 
prisoners remaining unconscious of their being 
Proprietors for the purchase of the Land: Government 
Magistrate is spaeaking of or dreaming of ?  - I who have
That time the prices of divers articles necessary as materials
 " of which , all to whom his character is known , will 
15. 
would be for his own advantage to give them 
submitt, both mental and corporeal, is far beyond any idea 
in
very reason a still better prison is not to 
the pursuit, in the Persuasion that this 
uncertain prudence of individuals. The declarations above men= 
the occupation of Fears and others , 
upon the said Panopticon plan , of proper form and sufficient mag-
C 
the said Buildings shall be readiness for the reception of the said
bar of the same size were both lying within your reach: 
-soever :  questions the answer to which might tend to 
 Justiciabilis  
1st. To furnish the prisoners with a constant supply 
is fleeting and variable ; as his Recollection of them
the quality of damage. 
such 
therein also described  , and appointing a Feoffee for the ma-
-ng Penitentiary Houses fit for the reception of 900 
C 
-rishment  :  poisoned by bad provisions or unwholesome 
3.dly We are further told  " there must not only
-cy of the weather . 
pain
 are convertible terms. So that, our definition 
7
7th . To give them an interest in their work by 
Of Frauds relative to the Coin . 
the Person who would murder ; it is evident it 
number a different one .
may be affected by them. They are offences against person, 
leading objects of the Penitentiary Act .
for the said intended Building as well as of divers articles  _ 
premium  :  and at a rate grounded on an
Of Injuries affecting loco-motion
"wheat and other grain in their possession." 
should be different
Jeremy Bentham under the name of a Panopticon 
or
that
upon the said Ground in such manner and under 
particular regulations can be of service will need to be different 
year with a compleat suit of such cloaths as shall 
erroneous ; hence arises what will still be doubtful
that time the prices of divers articles necessary as materials 
if not two , to force the intrenchments of it . Mortality
however it be out of its power to give satisfaction the 
could say to the contrary reiterating to one another the
Government out of the Value of the 
such grounds month after month , yeeaar after year , to
capital crime , not excepted :  treading underfoot a 
sees at once , the monstrous , yet in that quarter but too frequent , 
:posed to resort to that of which the offender is a mem= 
default of such Devisee or Devisees then by the Executor or 
any offender under the same such Overseer shall during the 
the same period have taken place in respect of any orther article or 
it is for that very reason it was determined not 
This is a good Country, and will do well: but its progress 
"native, Cole-be , who first beat her dreadfully about the head (the 
can ever be attended with . Legal penalties can attack only 
True it is that about 65 pages after, under 
Country immediately after _ if such should be his choice: _ ar- 
Economy 
6
 : spect actual past or present existence of the facts or circum=
said 
general Words to assure, me that she cannot have, 
 [  ( A )  Fact ]  It matters not whether the mis-supposal re=
cause ?   _  The question is not mine :  to the humane and intelligent 
Main- Text
This Distinction is far from being steadily
Exposition. 
-ful branches of vulgar learnings as well as 
upon 
-ing from London to Wandsworth , and on the West , 
-"matta, or the Hawkesbury, with any certain quantity at stated 
 : nued to suffer in his Liberty by means of the offence .
(3 
to commit the Crime whenever he has the Opportunity : 
enlarging his premises . This appears much 
Denomination .
1
is appropriated particularly to the subject of her 
-ligence , and then , to make up for it , the injustice . For four 
is to be none for England :  so well has it suc-
The station of Jailor is not in common account 
improvements of every kind made in or upon the said 
 [  ( a )  Only ]  I am speaking all along , it is to be remembered , of the case where 
-ference between estimated and actual expence could 
-effectually by something which is called Law . 
 Sydney New South Wales 20th May 1799 
a spectacle such as persons of all classes would 
But I had Cause at length to abandon 
the omission of it will become an accession to the List 
rate from the conversation of the Governor , the Governor speaking
a Justiciabilis maneas . If he is without that Jurisdic : 
 " habit of monopolising every article brought to the settlement for
the Select .
return without break of the law  _  the door is left wide open 
has by the Common Laws
Samuel Bentham Knight of the Military Order of 
C 
to the total amount of the enhancement so proved together with 
number of Convicts , three weeks notice at the least having 
there be not a "Panopticon for them to be sent to": _ 
Simple Personal Injuries 
the said Thomas Rhodes , and on other part , by lands 
done upon him )  may be sufficient . Such a summons may 
S . 2 .
Of Excuses Extenuations
:parable Disfigurement: 2. Irreparable Disablement: or 3. 
Art.3 . And Whereas the Proposal of the said Jeremy 
who without it would be murder ' d , his Friends , & 
Any person to whom money is tendered which he sus= 
Desertion, distinguishing it from the case of lawful Absence; 
Exposition 
You with a stick at a time that a stout stick and an iron 
limitations and restrictions as the said Commissioners 
the insurance of their lives , for an ordinary 
the
such
-dred & ninety four and his Majesty ' s reign the thirty fourth 
same tumult to sit a watch upon each other, and do what 
right. See Excuse II. Ignorance of the Law. 
on summons from the Court , or in Vacation time from 
Power assures me, as far as it is in the power of 
but by leave of the Court , on the part of any person 
"have quitted their comfortable abodes, females as well as males, 
which the several articles happen to be in use. Mean while any 
 " readily confirm "  . 
much time in explaining the nature & 
Building any number of persons may in as far as 
well as from suffering from the inclemency of the 
Aman
-so ever
belong to him; or by declining burthens that do belong to 
and out of the private fortune or saved by the inge-
to whom it is addressed , conformable to the Truth of
-ness of it ' s meaning :  The words  " superior , "   " inferior "  by meaning no- 
imprisoned felons , but among persons of the 
be delivered into his or their custody , by the direction of his 
cannot, amongst such character be a very popular one; that however 
Defraudment by false standards 
an unpaid gentleman  _  with a gentleman to whom
[(B) Colour] As if a slight scar be made on any part 
15 . To present to the Court of King ' s Bench on 
discreditable in the means . 
and the word  " obey , "  by sq inting at a sort of no meaning  [ which is ] 
in a small degree, to check the growing profligacy and abandoned 
it necessary , and thereby preserve them from be-
-ved to the choice of the said Jeremy Bentham and 
alluding to , and the  " attention "  shewn to them has been
-ment for example ?  applications have been made on
mankind in general . The least therefore which is expected 
borrows , he may be confined for life . 
The author , having turned his thoughts to the 
Crime .
[A Shape] As if his nose or ears or lips be split, or 
An Act for the effectual transportation of Felons and other Offen-
u
by w right, and wrong, he will tell You, that 
their hands to labour. 
deduction ought to be made on behalf of 
begins earlier. The business of a civil Judge extends to the in= 
For retaining the article relative to the insuring of 
2 . The unavoidable severity of the punishment , al-
that goes by that name and is administered as such 
that of the others: hence if the Interrogatories 
Act of the 1794 Ch . 37  _  And Whereas the
it shall be thought proper be kept under the in- 
or Fraudulent obtainment certain cases only excepted when
course of a tumult all offenders concerned in the same tumult 
and lawless tyranny .  _  
Art.11. No prisoner shall be suffered to have access 
falsely called moderate .
that Count Country , that for that very reason there
"civilize these people proved fruitless. Although they lived among 
The Jurisdiction within whose reach a man is at the 
Reasons 29 June 1795 .
hypothetical , depending for their Truth on the
from the amount of such enhancement as aforesaid or if no 
the first year .
"brought up in the settlement from their childhood, was cruelly 
Lastly as to the word  " bound "  :  so far is it from being of use to define
unpleasant or hazardous vicinity enables the whole 
17
the Existence of any one in particular and disaffirming 
expence of which maintenance for the first year was included in
can desire to mitigate .
2nd. To keep them clad in state of lightness and 
in Opinion . Such Arbitrators to settle what 
Panopticon Convict Proposal 1793
it ' s Conjugates above mentioned is coextensive with
at the end of it . 
in Order to avoid this Confusion that I give this Notice 
There remains the line of supposed profitable injustice _ 
saving only the honesty one the one part & the quietus on the other .
obstacle might till then have been opposed as such to his escape. 
they have a Mind to do :  now to be kept from 
upon the abovementioned terms he would engage 
is not a Man to be put into Possession of the Law 
Deputy present to the Court of King ' s Bench a 
:much that it would have been doubtful whether with the less 
soning men outright .  _  They afford very little security 
once for all , that if I use this technical Term in my
C 
2 
same being accordingly made up or to be made up by 
private stock destined to have been added thereto is though
whipped or sent to live at large in another country for , Seven 
that , 
in the occupation of the said Robert Moseley , 
 " starved "  :   _  appearances speak the same thing :   _  officers plump & rosy .
you rely for your Justifiation . It respects the matter
hazarded & of uncertain Verity ; as the Causes assigned
-ing obliged as in other places , to desist from their 
[(A) Les mischief] As if a man were suddenly to assault 
seeing a plan , which because sanctioned and again
 : stances
circumstances: _ whisper to him that all this Ma- 
Ch. Of Intention and Consciousness. 
I 
property of one person will answer the purpose as well 
Till now , the mask had been kept on  _  the hand of oppression
 " obtained , as , without adding to the burthen of the County-
metal is not near so great as that which may be made 
head of Sharping. ordinary defraudment. 
3 
spectacle such as persons of all classes would in the 
107 
-dinary culture of extraordinary talents is not 
-point under the management of any Overseer appointed by his 
on the part of the Court or Officer of the Crown , 
H . 167 . If there be a decorum due to exalted rank and authority ,
for the reformatory efficacy of him management , 
at least once in every month. 
Law in General  ( 7
that other piece or parcel of Garden Ground in the 
"quantity of grain he had to depend on, all those who cultivated 
greatest number of the four last years of Peace: 
general rule itself :  & then thought themselves justi
means prescribed in Art  [   ]  or any other means has been
-ries for the prisoners actually consumed within the said year
or erroneous in Legislation , after these the only true
 " necessaries as they required from those who had been long in the 
4.thly We are told that  " this felonious taking &
Divine Service , but on ordinary days at meal times 
supernumerary and the other half on that day twelvemonth clear of 
the six Species of Acts with which by the Epithet
course 
-lic  on behalf of the Prisoners is interested therein  :  
From this review then it appears, that 
II Collins 
for the said intended Building as well as of divers articles
 " been put on board arrived in a very damaged state , as appear ' d
In such case , the offender may be either banished quasi-imp=
birth, parentage and last abode; such as may lead to detection 
during such custody shall feed and cloth such offender and
matter .
II. To permit none to be used by any trader but what are 
made or to have been made to such Survivor , for or on account 
in
produced by the Punishment  [ which forms ]  the 
was- 
and supported me in these flights :  let me have Cocker and 
attainment of these ends and <gap/> it accordingly, 
:ber will naturally be that to which the injured state 
Would Your Lordship have supposed it ?  - It is
Mr Bentham, as the determination of Government, 
Room .
self- 
member will expect satisfaction in the first instance. If 
effect can have been expected from solitude . 
for every such day , if any , during which the same shall have 
and having made out as he flatters himself to 
which you please , to steal :  stealing therefore
all that will remain of the said allowed sum of 
Punishment for it is not of that Kind which , where 
For the Cases in which a Man may happen to be concerned 
expence to Government . 
"who, in order to prevent any unnecessary expence to the feeder, 
so repeatedly been prescribed by Parliament .  _  
-proved prisons disturb , of not distr y , whatever good
same periods respectively with every such account of alledged 
those 4. 
intitled An Act for erecting a Penitentiary House or Houses 
except in the Instance of False Tokens ; 4 False
the greatest. The profit upon a base shilling may, it is 
to put himself into, before he can be in a condition to 
new discovered one was now substituted. _ 
an indelible stain. 
would have resisted  <gap/>  with his blood - would to God
Now 
should not be opposed by any positive and_factitious obstacle, the 
Bentham and his Representatives shall in like manner be 
for confining and employing in hard labour, Persons 
is it  ( I wonder )  thant  " an application "  must have to
can make it appear that she was a Widow or had been de=
Liberty ,  ( B ) 
2. 
any Pinmoney or separate Maintenance" of which 
when he first launched into the subject , that he was 
dies under his care , taking thereby upon him 
inspected during every moment of their lives , 
clean sheeting or blanketing being supplied to each 
Irreparable Disfigurement is where in the shape or colour 
circumstance that applies not in one case out of ten thousand . 
 : ing not to be amenable to Law .
observed , it should be his study to render it a 
 " sanction of the Governor for their return . "  
Of Offences against Property
Art.10. The Prison shall at all proper seasons 
Or as if in a small island at a great distance from 
sole and universally acknowledged of the miseries and
fate depends ?  How many lacks or  <gap/>  must I be content to 
The four other words , Rule , Superior , inferior , obey , are all calcula- 
not 
32
:sive, or unwholesome, occupations. See 
Majesty, relative to the building of Penitentiary Houses 
2 
the part of the Court or Officer of the Crown , but by 
You intended for instance to strike the porter, 
of domestic Coin , if it happens to be counterfeit , he is no more 
advantage . 
Tit. Of Jurisdiction. 
The fatigue to which the Governor of this territory must 
any length of time or even for Life .
in concert. 
effect with that degree of certainty with which nothing 
fraud is punished with particular severity and measures
and for other purposes therein mentioned , or under such other 
Note
on the occasion of that word may be applied without repeating it , to 
:with to kill him or hurt him more than was necessary, it 
 " the colony and availed themselves of its necessities . "   _  
"justice. The governor also signified his determination, if any of the 
-ment , seven acres three roods and eleven perches , be 
"ground were directed to give in by a certain time a return of the 
4
 " subjecting the masters to certain penalties , on certificates being 
enhancement the amount of which reduction shall be deducted 
attended to , whenever therefore a Legislator makes 
Houses upon the said ground in such manner and under 
as also a proper and sufficient Infirmary shall be included . 
-lustrious predecessor , has spoken the word  _  has started 
 " application were made , where applications well-founded will 
West and North by the said road leading to and 
good or probable grounds for suspecting it to exist .
C
him. 
other things that the Commissioners of the Treasury for the 
-miter is equal to the Square of the ordinate
rendering it neither more nor less easy than under the old 
that if it is stolen , as fairly stolen  ( if it may be allowed 
 " colonists ; and it was understood that this system , so beneficial 
on any single Point but upon Terms [and those not 
attendance in that character , take their station
words: it amounting only to this, that law 
Of Simple Personal Injuries. 
expedients might be of use in the character of <gap/> 
though mitigated seclusion , in small assorted 
contract , has been induced to make public the 
shall deem necessary and expedient, and shall cause 
1 . He may be punished as for Simple personal Injuries
to oblige him to tell any thing which he does not like 
-ment has risen to an Equality with the Profit of
4
5th . To keep constantly from them , in conformity to 
of the use of a member altogether: incompleat when he 
"on account of the high wages, at less than fifteen shillings per 
Punishment ; and the Law is the more inexpedient , 
-posed one , will be produced hereafter .
the Debtor , the Law extends it to the Creditor . It seems an= 
6th To maintain them in a state of inviolable 
Frauds relative to the Coin. 
as well as on any other day upon summons from 
prescribes the observance of 
Speak to him then, my Lord, once more: _ 
as Gun powder Manufactorers, Turpentine Distillers, Manufactorers 
and situations there may be many which may present 
in consequence whereof the effective power of the said proposed
lands and buildings in the occupation of Robert 
80
In all these five Cases the Law is simply and 
eyes by a consciousness that they are fighting for justice as well 
to erect and adapt to the purpose aforesaid a build- 
another Title if I happen to fall upon it, I may 
-thing applicable to the purpose , but what is meant without them , 
7 . Where the Act prohibited is such as would pro-
16.th By neatness and cleanliness , by diversity of em-
 : tice may be from time to time enlarged .
aforesaid
Note 
of money for every prisoner convicted of a 
 : ry in order to discover more such women or for any such
 : bout his effects :  that would be an easy and natural way of 
With respect to the probably number of transport- 
I understand the object of these Acts to be, that 
Of Polygamy .
=tion immediately relates, whether 
in improvement would be considerable hastened, could Government 
"them by name to surrender themselves within 14 days, declaring 
the Parish of Battersea aforesaid , in the said
desertion. Within the dominions of the state they  might be manag= 
General Extenuation 
managing an establishment of such a nature , 
 " Many representations had been made on this distressing
 " subject ; and they seemed in some degree to have been attended to ,
There are two ways in which a man may be said 
frauds that can be committed in relation to any of those articles 
might say , the one that it was , the other that it was 
4th. To insure to them a sufficient supply of artificial 
of a fellow member; it will hardly expect more. 
medicine. 
person great or otherwise , who by what he  " feels "  about  " the 
Here also the Law is inexpedient  _  The 
classes or even in the improved prisons. 
cause
When a piece of counterfeit domestic Coin then is tendered to him , 
to him, that measures of this sort are disposed of, mo- 
it . 
-ment within England and Wales as his Majesty shall ap-
years :  not exceeding 25 if 4 years  :  not exceed-
When property to acquire value is dishonestly usurped
 1. For the cases in which a man may happen to be con= 
occasionally caused by any of the species of delinquency here 
 " sale ; a habit of which it was found impossible to get the better ,
execution of the same accordingly , and within a time to
of which by their frequent Use of it , Lawyers
C
reach or jurisdiction as it is called  , of the authority from 
:ed Yourself. 
4th . To insure to them a sufficient supply of artificial 
case to Mr Bentham for a short time. The Pro- 
Keepers whose trades are apt to occasion danger or annoyance; such 
shall deem necessary and expedient , and shall cause to be 
for supposing it to exist entertaining such a supposition .
to any kind of spirituous or fermented liquor, except 
shall 
2 
Exposition .
principle which the God of Justice has implanted in the human heart ,
expression of which was so unexpectedly brought to light
more than [Ten] miles distance from each other in point 
Frauds relative to the Coin .
proportionally insufficient for the said intended purposes
a 
It puts innocence upon a worse footing than criminality . 
right or no right  _  by the undistinguishing hand of blind
of the enhancement upon each :  such account to be accom-
If it be in the power of virtue to give a claim to 
way of amusement be curious to partake of :  and
As if there were a Law , that he who robs on 
-miscuous association, which in other improved pri- 
-ful plan - for emaciating his Majesty ' s subjects in by
imprisoned .
average of the number of deaths , not among 
being  " neglected "  - for exercising over his fellow subjects
3. It facilitates the detection of offenders; by making it 
a deep scar be made in any part of his body: so as 
 ( a )  Neild p . 315
thence to testimony) than the act itself of Coining: and 
The conclusion made by the patrons pa-
Mr King having laid before me a Letter from 
Art.9. Each prisoner shall be constantly suppli- 
in and by an instrument dated this day the said 
naturally under the several titles which are taken from 
p
system, or, if that could not be done, still easier _ one or other of 
either 
3 . Instead of such banishment or confinement he may be
such supernumeraries reckoning from the first shall be encreased by y reception of
 " they demanded more than five hundred per cent above what the
:polis of every judicial district. See B. Of Procedure. 
whatsoever :  questions the answer to which might 
sedeas may be the name of the Summons :  if not a
-ment , up to the very Point at which that punish-
receives by way of Addition to it the Misery of the
of the undertaking , and eventually a much 
will not go unpunished: since they will all come under the general 
33
shape . 
the Expression )  as any Thing whatever can be ,  [ still ]  the
appointed for these offences , which upon the whole is
as follows_ 
=liminary Acts which a man has occasion to perform, and 
"murdered at the brickfields by her husband, assisted by another 
 " every addition of freight , insurance , &c . They saw the wants of
intelligence would  ( it was known )  be as interesting ,
world instructed , at least as well as in ordi-
And Whereas in particular the price of bricks hath within
For damage sustained by parties injured in the 
under the proposer ' s care  :  viz  :  a sum not ex-
look at it . The visit not being to be prevented , nothing 
or more Penitentiary House or Houses  , for the purpose of con-
28th of March 1794 Ch.15 , as also the price of glass by an
sanction :  if kept , men are kept from doing what 
Irreparable Personal Injuries are either 1. Irre= 
some degree to answer that design. They are taken with 
Things :  we may venture to establish it as an uni-
-quisite to enforce the execution of the same according- 
its reach, the injured state may naturally enough be dis= 
he wishes to be ; so it be a place to which he could have
Male Convicts at the least , together with a Chaplain , Surgeon , Task-
declared] of his reading the whole Book? And 
its appurtenances , or in quality of provisions or other necessa-
6 . When any Man is convicted of Polygamy , before any defi=
he the said Jeremy Bentham hath proposed at his 
2. 
inserted in such Contract or Contracts such lawful clauses , 
municipal Law, our Author has spent 
that
would have nothing to do but to pay his third and 
described for the purpose of causing to be erected thereupon one 
-ness, superior to what is usual among the lower clas- 
"imagined that they were stimulated to this destructive conduct by 
said 
in on or about the 17th of March 1793 And Whereas since 
time he receives the Summons may either be within the 
it be such foreign Coin as the State has thought proper to adopt :  
21
difference.] 
animated by the moral approbation with which they can survey
-ved any advantage . 
he is forced but that he chuses so to do . The question then upon 
you to think of his behaviour, are provoked to strike 
our Sovereign Lord George the 3rd , by the Grace of God of Great 
Bentham of Lincoln ' s Inn Esquire  , of the other part . 
o
"wife of a man named Ye-ra-ni-be , both of whom had been 
Premises &c . in Consideration of the said 
Main-Text. 
this even when taken separately; much more when they 
the weather. 
which the summons is issued , or without it . If either , he 
possessed or intitled so to be as aforesaid , with power to appoint 
his predecessor to hunt out of their holes .  _  
Law is inversely as the Magnitude of the Punish-
the
own person I use it not in Concurrence with , but in 
ever
:pon the same footing. 
is prossecuted , public notice shall be given for any other woman
or single; and if single whether Bachelors or Spinsters, Widowers 
-ment after moment, sometimes upon one principle, 
of wholesome food, not limited in quantity, but a- 
18
Report , exhibiting in detail the whole state , moral 
such and such Consequences will follow. But 
-trate  ?  Then as to foundation  _  what sort of a ground
Bentham's account, but on the account of Government: 
lighted. 
the 
or be removed to and confined in any other place , as his Ma-
Would to God that any considerations whatever , divine
within it , if he has a Summons to return a Justiciabilis 
The
the said period undergone an enhancement by means of a
necessary in the Commander in Chief. 
knowing himself to have no right so to do , and intend=
either a 
To Obey , is to do what is prescribed :  what has been said therefore 
the intervention of improvement from this branch of Le= 
in the way of amusement be curious to partake 
 " inserted in all future Contracts for shipping for the Colony , 
reader misinterpret my meaning .  _  I am not examining
leg would not be materially greater or less than what he 
-chiavelism for throwing prisoners upon Counties 
-nates as shall be found necessary to the said purpose in which 
of the Crown , but by leave of the Court on the part 
particularly with regard to accomplices ; because their 
be allotted, and with a clean shirt at least twice in 
-foresaid but only a partial allowance towards the 
:fence be confined to a single state, the secondary mischief, 
account to the day on which the amount thereof shall have been re-
It is not true that the word  " taking " 
same period continue to be made unto the person or persons 
It will be necessary to define what shall be deemed 
which the town is taken or destroyed . 
These are Forgery coining and dealing with false 
and to that purpose shall be supplied at least once a 
a very elevated one :  the addition of Contractor has 
charge , it is moreover agreed that he the said Jeremy Bentham shall 
[(B) Uncertain efficacy] As if in the case just mentioned it hap= 
"was as destitute of this quality as the most ignorant of his coun- 
 [  ( B )  Concerned ]  See Tit :   [ Of Associates in Delinquency ] 
in producing bodily pain or uneasiness by selling unwholesome provisions, 
establishment into which all such as thought 
prisons unthought of by Parliament , that 
15
shall be put to him in relation thereto , not only on 
one of the tendencies just mentioned. Not that this deter= 
the prices at the two periods in question and the amount
see Ch . XXI . S .
-ment in relation to the intended establishment with 
-victs which under the powers of the said Act might be committed to his 
Let certain methods be established whereby the Husband 
the whole produce and profit of their labour, and the 
work , as well as from suffering from the inclemen-
or broken :  if broken , there is an Unhappiness 
so forth  :  and in the year of our Lord one thousand seven 
not equal it .
road leading out of the road from London to Wands-
Of Kidnapping Confinement
Brown , containing by admeasurement , seven acres 
62 
seem to make no small account _  animus
nor the Common Law without the Statute which
25
Sect . I . Law in General .  ( 7 
matter .
that class, our difficulties will ever be very considerable: the 
weather. 
and medical of the establishment  :  together with the 
to become a suitor , and perhaps in vain , for such 
warmth and light, whenever the season renders it 
such Penitentiary Houses should be used principally 
Theft ; by which means Things are brought to that
or other of these Circumstances unquestionably had 
-spection of any person or number of persons in 
For kidnapping the Offender ' s punishment shall
some 
-ploying irons on any occasion , or in any 
as the herein abovementioned original number of 1000 with the addition 
be any other offered against Justice than what have 
Rashness consists in the supposing a circumstance
way as that in question in the former case as in the latter. 
less rights than other conquer in the same predicament .
taken in the first place, for preventing the emigration of each 
of wholesome food, not limited in quantity, but ade- 
the Community , as likewise at the long run to 
want of the inventory :  and a situation , this clip-
so seized and possessed as aforesaid : the value of such Build- 
final
the matter of fact where you suppose some damage to 
all deductions with interest in case of arrear as herein abovementioned . 
-ing thereon and occupied therewith : And in default of such 
may be determined by lot) in the Shops of the several Tradesmen; 
any of them have failed, in that case Justice cannot 
a plan like this , my Lord had been but a project ! 
4
:nal, or at most not directly but only indirectly intentional. See Introd. 
furandi is the Will , Design , Intention , call it
for 25 per Cent less than it costs Government to 
Letter 3rd
proper effect and advantage to the public, have been able to 
-able Convicts _ 
offence can, by any Jail or number of Jails, improved 
either to the matter of fact or the matter of Law . It res=
 ( Your Lordship will see presently )  has been wasted in New South 
very quantity which eventually ensues, the act may be said 
If a different one , the place a man happens to be at the
criminals , & of which the promulgation is the only punishment
:tence has been once passed. 
mercy, has he not virtue to comm command it? 
Exposition
Quasi Trial 
"supposed to ill relish the life of their parents, when grown up, 
"the time of their committing these depravations. In order to get 
excused from saying in a Manner any thing about
weights
to make sure what certainly ought if possible to be made 
punished as severely as a fraud upon one of so high a value 
"the rearing of swine in the colony, as well as of every other 
a greater surface; as it were, to observation ( and from 
Note 
only Coin which a man is obliged to accept in payment  :  unless 
if he suspects it , measures are taken , I suppose , by the Laws of 
"and on such conditions as should be agreed, with any person who 
Bodies actually existing are all hypothetical
with the delusive shadow of Right Instruction , never
a
way of medicine. 
with this unpaid Jailer :  in the next place , with
Where the quantity of damage which was intended is the 
a Law , he may be perfectly certain he is doing
regards the matter of fact or the matter of law. It regards 
and on the West by the said road leading to 
My former knowledge and acquaintance with this Country 
10
sight of his  <gap/>  royal master , that authority which , if
one another at stated intervals: and let a failure on either part 
"common mode of chastising their women), and then put an end to 
center in great persons? 
hundred and ninety five  , between The Right Honourable the 
P. 196 January 1799. "That he [the Governor] might ascertain what 
up by the root. I have persisted in my attempt to that end, and 
 " man , the importance of restraining vice , & improving 
Theft . Why Theft , Embezzlement , and ordinary Sharping
Whatever had been the term of punishment fixed by each man's 
The Author of the Commentaries has
but the word  " taking "  implies nothing about the
and from which none but the guilty ever derived any 
divided 
Exposition .
13th . To insure to them a livelihood at the expi-
prescribes it. 
Satisfaction & Certainty from any of the respective 
-versal and inviolable Rule , for those who mean to
S . 3 . 
Such 
will be a matter of no immediate concern to me; if I succeed only 
Unhappiness in the Community but the Punish-
-ally expended in it , and if his Grace ' s will be done
this 
The Decisions of Mathematics as applied to
in the latter person  _  the Unhappiness concomitant 
frequently covenants with her Friends to allow 
together with the times at which they were respectively con-
4. Even to the party himself by whom the provocation is 
C
 " governor therefore purchased a thousand bad rugs , which had
Husband. At present these important enquiries are left to the 
said including
any accident of its failure , by paying a sum 
-ration of their terms  :  by setting up a subsidiary 
of 
Under Disfigurement is comprised Discolourment. 
motive of rapacity and not in motives of resentment the 
pieces or parcels of meadow and pasture ground in 
a very questionable Crime at that Time , if any ,
-ders and to authorise the removal of Prisoners in certain cases , 
 " by a survey which was immediately taken . "  
depending for their Truth on the Decisions of exter-
pleasure .
every such supernumerary . Provided that such addition after having 
In the Panopticon system Your Lordship has been
"store, they might make the same known to the commissary, 
:ber. It may perhaps expect the same punishment to 
as well as from suffering from the inclemency of 
or Widows. Of these declarations let Registers be kept, of which, 
Whereas it is therein also provided that after the removal of 
scale
criminal :  to save this it punishes him worse than if he 
or under sentence of transportation and appearing in manner 
which a man would have an adequate inducement to accept 
15000
is commonly distinguished by the name Piracy. 
much strength. that it will require immense labour to grab them 
-soners remaining unconscious of their being thus 
-ing Convicts in general , or such of them as 
they were in rightful possession Upon the same 
any other such supernumerary , except in as far as the total number of 
reciprocal assurances of that persevering fondness for
Piece of Ground has been fixed upon accordingly and 
would think themselves obliged to disaffirm it of 
a certain day of every Term , and afterwards print 
apinative decree :  which done the record goes up to 
those distinguishable lines of conduct would (in my humble 
have the care , management , superintendence and controul 
or or 
worse than none :  _  it has had every property of refusal ,
-mitations and restrictions as the said Commissioners 
who dies a heavy fine  ; and this without proof of deliquency 
Mr Bentham was, for months together, with the 
Convict before the expiration of his legal terms of punishment_ 
pocket or to waste , in addition to the million and odd which
9 
"kind of live stock, a circumstance that must not <gap/> only prove 
- " tion to this Country , not many could hope to obtain the
say to him any thing that will make him easy. 
-ring their confinement , without any farther 
in the occupation of the said Henry Brown , on the 
the 19 of his Majesty Chapter 74 the same would have 
times be found to have undergone a considerable enhancement ,
of obtaining compleat compensation than they would other= 
 ( 1 
the property is not visible . Where it is there is no need either of Imprison
1 Embezzlement ; 2 Personation ;  ( at that Time
and the Misery of the Criminal is doubled .
C
which the mischief turns is whether there be any case in 
-fied in dispossessing the infidels of Lands in which
48 
medical assistants constantly living in 
sure that in no case the wicked man try may
2. 
woman who has put in her claim to collect her proofs , such no=
Government, in treaty on his own account with the 
of 
 " consisting of implements of husbandry , cloathing , and stores , had
It will in many instances be impossible to distingu= 
medicine . 
when examined , will be found to be of little force . A piece 
powerful weapon of the two, you could have effectually defend= 
of all securities against abuse . 
or Inspection House in and by means of which said 
can be a matter of more profound indifference to 
 ( says one of those to whom this humane Jailor ' s Letter
manage all the duties of my office - But I had been long 
manner that he might be obliged to have it cut off, or if 
each of them in the degree necessary to prevent it from
operations 
to the Police-Offices, are very insufficient. 
practice so happily received, every kind of strong & 
"settlers and others were informed, that when any individual should 
person who hires , under a penalty .  _  
 [  ( A )  Retaliation ]  See Unlawful Confinement sub voce  [ Retaliation . ] 
he may have ; and in taking any other expedients that 
Coin that has happened to make its appearance and by the 
THEFT
16 
abuses which have been so notoriously prevalent in prisons . 
2. Laws relative to the several sorts of Manufactorers or Shop= 
-out and advance to be made by Government for 
the effect of which would be to render it more difficult from this 
as operate on Will :  the expectation I mean of pain or pleasure .
an office . But inventions unpractised might be in 
- ployment , by variety of contrivance , and above all , 
any such cheaper means did actually occur to the party at 
of 
employed; nor shall it be considered whether a person revolving 
-ly, and within a time to be limited And Whereas 
Exposition .
by Parliament , prescribed by an Act , confirmed four years
50
establishment to be inspected at a view , from a com-
so clear, as that the Jury could concur in affirming 
therein mentioned fit so to be removed to such place of confine-
own expence but upon such terms and conditions and 
Of Matrimonial Desertion. 
with gross oppression and injustice :  in the first place the neg- 
the Crime . " 
beings that have will :  beings that have understanding to apprehend 
as shall be put to him in relation thereto , not only 
sion was specified by it , it might serve to give an intimation of 
to this . What is  " prescribed "  says our Author himself ,  " must be noti- 
C
producing some contact between the body occupied and
that can be inflicted on them . It is a restraint which ought 
if thereto ordered or required by the Court in person , 
the effect of which is to render his aspect less agreeable. 
In this most instructive paragraph , Your Lordship 
When the time mentioned in the Notice is expired a
wrong." [If You ask our author, what he means 
sometimes upon opposite principles, as the cove 
of a man's person any unalterable change is produced 
Blackburn & Hardwick Architects of the expence of erecti-
certain evil composed of delay, vexation and expence 
on the South by lands in the occupation of 
of such offences. As 
is given to his Majesty to direct the removal of any male 
than the Penalty actually annexed to it _  ; but not
any body than it is to great persons in what Jal 
Of Irreparable Personal Injuries 
III 
duty thereon imposed by Parliament , to wit by an Act of the
would be offences: A man may commit an offence in 
"her existence by driving a spear through her heart. 
less than one might be substituted in it ' s
Distinction between them would not in every Care 
are liable, whether it can or cannot be proved that they act 
a particular purpose, and to oblige a friend: certify 
No. . 3 . Page 44 .  " What then may not reasonably be 
"a great benefit to the public, but be also highly to the advantage 
Executors Administrator or Administrators of , or person or 
directions limitations and restrictions as his Majesty shall 
person, or body of men who are invested with 
which puts it upon the footing of domestic  . On this account it may 
(C) 
"have prepared a number of such animals fit for the public 
true be 24 times as great (or perhaps more) as the profit 
that he might be obliged to have his fore-arm cut off, and the 
spirituous liquor, unless where ordered in the way of 
comfort and satisfaction, the prospect of which I had so vainly 
inches or by neglect  :  worn out by want of rest or nou-
These provisors for estimating the damage that may 
The import they ought to have in order to be true in this place we 
to be appointed by the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury or 
Instructions to the Legislator 
and Pasture Ground in the occupation of the said 
from the Court , to make answer to all such questions 
gone
"It was distressing to observe that every endeavour to 
upon the premises , notwithstanding that 
-"trymen. "It is an extraordinary fact, that even their children, who 
The 
fatal to Acts of Parliament: _ assure him, that neither 
C 
coming at them , which the Common Law abhors . This is ow= 
=kind. 
On this account it comes to be the more material to 
by the secret will of this servant of the Crown out of
obliged as in other places, to desist from their work, 
relatives to this head do not indeed strictly speaking belong to
1 .
dispatched in a small compass , it may not be amiss to insert
his arithmetic with me  _  for it was he that led me into them . 
-er to choose an umpire . 
to this Lawyer 
the time. 
Offences against Justice. 
1 
B 
whole quantity of Peruvian bask there is on the island be :  
the most generous of its supporters .  _ 
G 
Under the article the Governor gets a small annual pre-
see, that by her Husbands License "which he 
may be estimated at . 
from the State of which the Pirate is a member is that 
1 . Where the party injured dies without having regained his
is right which the law declares to be right, 
not more than that during which the party injured conti=
remind him, that in the place he has in view, no 
Standards shall be universally adopted , and universally
necessary for the maintenance of the said establishment , the
against destructive habits  :  against the being killed by 
all such questions as shall be put to them in rela-
in these its less perfect forms , that the hostility
in his Definition
more . Robbers and Burglarers may be , and often
extended application of the principle of the Sun- 
which the uneasiness is produced: the touch however slight may 
5
to be dear to every man. 
receives little light from the addition of these 
Upon the abovementioned terms he would engage 
economical state thereof , at least in so far as the pub-
between floor and floor consulting with one another by
For 
in point of time. 
1. To the party himself who is provoked. 
to find myself be sent with me :  let me have King Lords and
Existence, yet not knowing precisely which, they 
Jails , for producing Jail-Fevers in them or whatever
in it .
other miseries might be the result of their being  " crowded " 
and behalf of his Majesty of the one part and Jeremy 
or import of a Law  , or rule of unwritten Law , which
Proposal
thus observed , it should be his study to render it 
of the jurisdiction  , a summons to stay , meaning within 
said Jeremy Bentham shall be in readiness to receive the said number of 
delay from whence such encrease of charge hath accrued hath
mitigated seclusion, in small assorted companies, 
every instruction by which the value of their 
same to retain subject only to the allowances to be 
Jail, or Hulk, or improved Colony, and in what numbers, 
"periods." 
or human , religious or moral , of police or economy , of
Unless this be the sense to be given to these words I see
I pay a couple to another, for any one that I 
to be inserted in such Contract or Contracts such law- 
"the inhabitants of the different settlements, were kindly treated, 
rate the alledged merits , of the Penitentiary system ,
If the place in which the offence was committed be 
supposed 
short of the Misery of the first , so that it does 
cannot mistake nor
of those made by the same Objects in other men ,
3
previous to their being married, copies should be required to be 
and for such considerations, terms, conditions, powers, 
same jurisdiction by which the something in question is 
 " in want of many necessary articles of life ; and when there were
economical , of the establishment :  and then & there , 
 : risoned , imprisoned or confined to hard labour for
be 
such diminution shall have taken place then to make declaration 
had worked unseen  _  the force of nature  _  the preventive powers
Mutilation. 
-taining together , by admeasurement  , eighteen acres 
said building or in some Building or Buildings adjoining a 
11 
mean not to change my system; which, be assured, from being cal- 
Majesty , whereupon it is therein moreover provided that every 
you suppose to have established the fact or circumstance
of the said Proposer for the purposes aforesaid  , was delivered 
to such effect  :  and the ballance of such account of enhancement and
 ( A ) 
Contradistinction to the other .
 : pects the matter of fact when the mistake is concerning
P. 196. January 1799. "Wheat at this time bore a high price 
according to the number of years he had been 
6th. To maintain them in a state of inviolable though 
fall off from faces of higher rank , than those of 
by the falsifying of the more precious metal. But the case 
me, had been sown for a very considerable time; and, being of 
and building one or more Penitentiary House or Houses 
=tinuing in the intention of occupying . Securing is the
natives 
much inferior will be produced hereafter to this sup-
other mode of disposing of Convicts) perhaps not above 
 Circle to any Part of it are equal :  if of a parabola ,
upon him but upon the tenderer . This obligation to accept is a 
a subject that belongs properly to that branch , and may be
then and there , as well as on any other day or days 
different . Yes , my Lord :  It is among the most dis-
16th By neatness and cleanliness , by diversity of 
peril ; so that if it turns out not to be good , the loss falls not 
corresponding to that of the word  " prescribe , "  and is to be produced  _ 
 -rate , would enable the magistrates to carry the plan 
permanent practices, such as the carrying on of dangerous, offen= 
"ing what is right, and forbidding what is 
and even make amends in most instances for 
38 
of the counterfeit foreign Coin  , if he did not suspect it so to be . 
no one of them was pursued) is scarce worth arguing about. 
him, it is a less offence than if you struck him in the 
be suffered to shew itself upon a large one  :   _ 
you can have of the nature of his duty rendering such fatigue 
Innocent or culpable , culpable in a less degree or in a greater 
Simple Of <gap/> Extenuations. 
"personal safety which they enjoyed, a young young woman, the 
upon specific acts  :  upon the wounding  , starving or poi
be thought that the counterfeiting of the former is more mischie= 
them all. 
that
Penitentiary system from its first origin , and having 
and what steps shall be taken for giving notice. 
Circulation ; 5 False Weights and Measures ; 6
may want, will his be all of the same sort? 
in a building of such a construction would be by 
Mr MacKintosh ' s speech  _  It was the moral anger of disinterested spec-
return of a de jure emancipated Convict _ to take measures for 
182
may occur for preventing the offence . This holds good more 
some other body . here we are arrived at sensible ideas
from those instructions .
6
Of Frauds relative to the Coin. 
:nishing him : as likewise in punishing any accomplices 
Author intended and the examples above cited
And Whereas in and by the said last mentioned Act power 
12
["It is also, says our Author, a rule, command- 
Note 
be prevailed upon not to overstock us with the worst description 
here is that the mischief is not to be estimated from the ef= 
for confining and employing Convicts it is provided among 
  " morals , to the welfare of society ?   ( a )  ?  +  It would be impossible , 
wasted upon it , was termed a  " project "  , and under
bound to render a like amount of every such reduction at the 
sum . As where a quantity of gunpowder or of water is 
necessary 
had been shewn )  mortality is raging the Hulks :  Sir
:ter of law, where you suppose him to have no right 
Stock use will probably more than counter balance the 
9 
6 
may be made by the falsifying any piece of the less precious 
C
or incompleat:  it is compleat where a man is deprived 
# it 
5
justice
time of summons is presented to him will either be the
25 73 
 "  ( a )  This testimony , it is humbly hoped , will not be 
employing & reforming Convicts
this and other purposes was thought necessary: and 
:gislation: for as long as the Legislator can devise any 
:pose and in every convenient place is the business of the Sove: 
that
and eighteen perches , be the same more or less , and 
ever taken out of the hands of Parliament, unless for 
Feoffee so appointed , such seizin and possession as aforesaid 
pressed :  at the same time that as no particular mode of expres- 
have already given .
all such allowances as under the terms of this agreement were 
her Imperial Majesty's Service, Brother of the said 
to be appointed by each of the parties to these presents , with pow-
[(B1 Injury] It matters not to whom the injury in ques= 
-sons disturb if not destroy whatever good effect can 
and moreover that they shall also by such Deputy or 
3rd. To keep them supplyed with separate beds and 
My Lords, Whitehall 14 Oct. 1799. 
may 
the 
provision for old age , upon the plan of the 
-ed by them for Government :  upon the terms of 
It applies to this purpose the united powers of 
any other Land . such as S.t Helena in the Pacific Ocean 
only exposing the abuses of it men who misapply
embezzled or destroyed at the time of a seige although it 
never come back again. The plan, if there had been any 
3 
Labour in these unnecessary Distinctions , he had
single piece is the greatest, the difficulty of getting it off is 
At first sight it may appear hard that a fraud upon 
has ever found the most cordial of its well-wishers  _  
-duce Unhappiness in the Community , and less
which
he happens to be in to the place where he is to have justice 
arm or the leg without depriving him of either, the act 
place as the closet of any such person as the  " great
 " which last arrived . These , with a compleat suit of the clothing 
Quest. III. Why Coins of different Metal are put u= 
minds: explain to him, that when persons are approved of, 
-tal Punishments on Thefts .
the period arrives , to two Arbitrators , one to 
of place, nor more than [Ten] days distance from each other 
in misapplying those which do: & therefore, 
was a mere make-believe: satisfy him that nothing 
 : pects either to be diminisshed otherwise than by reasonable wearing
assigned for this departure: Mr Bentham's consent to it 
Corporal Injuries 
10. 
 an one enacted by any Legislator .
 " into effect "  .  _  
10th . To provide them with spiritual and 
"fed, and often cloathed, yet they were never found to profess the 
means it is subservient to the purpose of prevention. 
Rei , vel etiam usus ejus Possessionisve . #
XI
the purpose of preventing the principal one to which they 
are likely to come in the offender's way. An act of Piracy is 
Reasons. 
operations 
Hulk , he learnt what is mentioned by Sir Henry Mildmay & Mr Neild :   ( a ) 
Art . 22 . And Whereas by a Report made to the Honourable 
from the time of their receiving sentence, till an 
them , & give them an extension beyond what their
it matters not whether it be by Theft or embezzlement
 : ing stored up in a certain place is destroyed 
C
 ( B )   ( C ) 
There remains nothing now but to make provision 
him. In such case unless it appears that you deliberately took 
-victs, which the Panopticon proposed to be erected by 
1 
persons intitled to take out Administration to, the personal 
-"tions, "and frequently attempted to take their lives; yet they were 
tendered it , or none that is sufficient to warrant the employ=
guilty man
2. It also gives a much better chance to parties injured 
-ed with a separate bed and bedding of sufficient 
where upon snatching up the iron bar you strike him in 
wherefrom this Consciousness might be infer'd were 
House , and dated the 22nd day of March 1784 it appears , 
3 
-ses or even in the improved prisons. 
were . 
"seldom refused a live corn when they were asked for it. It was 
14 .
of the same and of all and every offender and offenders who shall 
his receiving the produce of their labour , taking 
invented by the guilty for the benefit of the guilty , 
p
all these improved prisons has been somewhat 
-ges or tenements now in the several occupations of 
there 
Wales ?   _  of how much human suffering must I be a contented
articles so employed or consumed as aforesaid the said Jeremy 
be chosen by government , the other by 
their sentiments towards others , who are ennobled in their own 
 " ships and the Walker , but , unfortunately , not any bedding . The 
the Author I may also see, that "if she has 
C 
same the bulk of the expenditure necessary for the 
drug or to expose himself to circumstances injurious to his health . 
Britain France and Ireland King  , Defender of the faith & 
ment or examination . 
in
of any other person whatsoever . 
Labour .
 : tion either he has been within it or not . If he has been 
17 March 1792
-ty or untill his Majesty shall direct the return of such Offender 
17
it is still as true as ever , that after the punishment
A private gentleman could point to Lord Pel-
of promiscuous association , which in other im-
afterwards made by the said Architects would for the 
 _ how easily , we have seen above .
too hard upon Government , & it would be 
so as to leave neither hollow nor protuberance: 
1. This makes it the interest of all persons concerned in the 
will prove that these abuses have been productive 
 ( A ) 
the criminal branch ; but as they are intimately connected with
rather a prolific nature amongst such people, had gained so 
to occupy :  keeping is continuing to occupy or con=
Of Injuries affecting loco-motion
the
-prietors not complying; an Act of Parliament for 
9th . To pay a penal sum for every escape , with or 
2
carrying 
-ing it .
in 
I. To establish public standards of each kind in the Metro: 
done upon him . Such a Summons to stay may be stiled 
stealing is wilful stealing :  and what is
communicated to the Mint .
A plain proof that all idea of refunding was 
so forth, as the case may be. 
the point at which all definitions must have an end
Sir
-ing of a new and peculiar nature invented by 
shall still be accounted justifiable self-defence 
conquest of an infidel country , the conquered have 
does not seem to demand in any considerable degree a great= 
"When spoken to or censured for robbing the maize grounds, 
THEFT .
whose leg you have broken. If 
exist where there were no good or probable grounds
Art. II. VII. Appeal warranting function. A certain 
Persons 
should seem therefore mighty easily distinguishable
C 
but that due satisfaction should be made to Mr 
5
fined
them here . The tenor of these Provisions may be as follows : 
warmth, and kept in a state of constant cleanliness 
has hitherto advanced. 
necessary, and thereby preserve them from being 
has altered it , nor the Letter without the Practice
& legislature 
"bodies, burn the homes of the settlers if they stood in lonely situa- 
Lords Commissioners of his Majesty ' s Treasury on the part 
human creatures starve or poison one another, so that 
an umpire. 
felony after his discharge , at a rate increasing 
All illegal acts are to be deemed parts of the Same 
is a rule of action prescribed by him, who 
C
idle and worthless. 
III. To cause frequent visitations to be made by certain offi: 
Such are the methods that have occurred to 
an intermitting fever rages and a great proportion of the 
Bills of Mortablity . 
Of Kidnapping Confinement .
we learn is taking with the will to steal ; alias
convenience of each moment presents them to great 
the Medium of any of those specific Heads: the 
it might have this Inconvenience, that the 
I know not what obscure sort of an appointment , without expres- 
any legislative Institutions are in like Manner
more or less , bounded on the South by lands in 
For a new and less expensive mode
by how much less the Misery of the second falls 
 " were in future to carry out convicts or stores to that country . "  
:son, his property or his authority. 
amounts there will be twice as much to dispose of in any such 
the Moral Idea :  Larceny with the Legal .
the several preliminary situations it is necessary for him 
 " person here alluded to , but a declaration , the truth 
South , on part by lands in the occupation of the 
to give up the Pleasure of satiating the keen 
and so from time to time be at liberty to deliver in an account
a man is concerned in conveying a person against his will
12 July 1803 
to be adequately intentional with respect to its conse- 
to their circumstances , to such provision as he can make
-master or Schoolmaster and such other officers with their Subordi-
"would get give immediate notice of the day and place when 
not what sense can be assigned to them
In Conclusion , if it be true the Use of
considered
particulars have concurred, in that case Justice cannot 
upon healing to leave a hollow or protuberance. 
to
be assigned why the punishment in the one case
[(D) Uneasiness] It matters not how slight the contact + is by 
within the dominions of a third state it is from such third 
Estate was disposed of effectually by something which
C 
would now be just as bad again as it was before _ 
 " considered as an instance of flattery to the great 
informer belongs the credit of it .  _  
lately contrived a building in which any number of 
 " been received by the Walker ; but , unfortunately , much of what had
"had been bred among the white people, and who, from being 
for settling the disputes that are apt to arise concerning the weight
* What strange place can this be which the worthy
fraudulent it is expressly confounded  _ 
there is also a much more sacred decorum due to virtue  +  
Reasons. 
C 
of Oil of Vitriol, Tanners, Tallow Chandlers, Brasiers, Pewterers &c. 
Years , or be confined to work for two or three Years . If he 
and for such considerations , terms , conditions , powers , li-
-ceived by him . Provided that if any reduction of price shall within 
incomplete
-rangements, if not of the positive cast, at any rate of the negative 
Examples of real Laws , in the Degree of 
4th To insure to them a sufficient supply of artificial 
 " importance of restraining vice and improving morals "  is to
The intelligent reader will easily perceive & the candid
are , indicted only of the latter Crime .
no safer rule can be adopted, than by taking the 
:cerned in occasioning bodily pain or uneasiness in another by 
but either no suspicion at all is entertained of the person who
obliged to take , than he is to take counterfeit foreign Coin . 
how
Kidnapping is where without lawful cause 
in the next place, for affording him the means of quitting the 
2. It matters not whether the Mis-supposal in this case 
or unimproved, be ever given to Noble Lords, whose 
to have any particular means in its hands of punishing 
made to such prisoners in manner herein after 
but economical , of the establishment :  and then and 
and effectually under the eye of justice it is hereby 
8 years have never yet been able to meet with anything
as receptacles for such transportable Convicts as the 
When an Offence against Property originates in a 
 : nveyed against his will , if that be the place at which
the validity nor the fitness of the laws of Revelation . I am
Mr Long of the 27th ulto, desiring, by command of 
proper should be admitted , and in which 
=ed in the manner mentioned in the Book of Procedure. Tit. 
conception) have been the line of justice: which of them (since 
:reign. To give these institutions their full effect and render the 
can be put in Contradiction ; the Case of a Law 
seven years or any shorter term _ care would have been taken at 
will resort in the first instance. It may however resort 
the said Jeremy Bentham appointed sole Feoffee for 
they would be continued in the exercise of 
persons intitled to take out Administration as aforesaid : And 
make it a  " well founded "  one ?  - An Act of Parlia-
as another . If therefore the primary mischief of such an Of: 
is 
 " their return , refrain from the vices or avoid the society of 
3 . Instead
would suffer from the loss of a fore-arm, in either of these 
:er punishment than the other. Where the profit upon a 
cause to be erected and adapted to the said purpose a Penitentiary House 
the expence of building fitting up and stocking as a-
were they to perform such or such acts in future such acts 
and that is wrong which the law pronounces 
is in their power to moderate each others violence. By this 
The survivors , upon his enquiry , say they are  " half 
"bushel." 
H p 89 Libel undefinable . 
 " been manufactured in some of the Spanish settlements on
without any default of his , irresistaible violence 
(A) 
up the iron bar in preference to the stick intending there= 
and natural , combination  _  the combination of gross negligence 
therefore
the 
2 
3. To the Public: For the interests of the Public ought 
of the greatest mischiefs , & would be so again , if
Majesty , His Heirs or Successors , under such powers , directions , 
Land or any part thereof as for the moveable stock remain- 
-ment , tho '  it ' s Infliction were certain , is insufficient , 
the consequence? that for each Convict House rent 
such 
of becoming the Subject of an Act of that Nature , but only
nations
86
crime , not excepted :  treading underfoot a maxim 
stamped by authority. 
at the least .
4
by the great person, nor by any other, is the purse 
 " away from the Colony was now "   ( says he )   " a matter of some 
-pondent to that of the genuine meaning of the same word .
I know not exactly which )  but to be delighted with
the same more or less , bounded on the North by 
on Restraint  _  the Unhappiness of being obliged 
noble game , and caused the mask of humanity to 
-ing together , by admeasurement , seven acres two 
for their return :  as soon as their right of returning takes 
much ,
of all or any such articles expended either in quality of
Main-Text
of Law , when the mistake is concerning the existence
Now
the Court , to make answer to all such questions as 
P. 126. September 1790. "In order to encourage as far as possible 
-ped of emoluments while it was loaded with obliga-
of an hour .
Jeremy Bentham and his Representatives shall at any time
of
 ( 5 
extension of the Colony Plan, or adoption of some 
Irreparable Disablement may either be compleat 
 " improved prisons "  as well as  " improved Colonies "  the
18
-poser Now therefore it is hereby farther agreed that the said
the said Thomas Rhodes , on the South by lands 
constitute some degree of excuse extenuation. 
(a)The distinction is material: for as fixed income comes 
in paving the way to the consideration of 
It had been well if instead of losing his
 " as in several of the last arrivals from England , certain articles ,
 " to each , were now issued to the convicts . "  _ 
 : ing adverses measures for bringing him to Justice . Provisions
as the Silver or even the Gold Coin, since the profit that 
whensoever he shall have fulfilled the present agree-
impediment to 
the said Jeremy Bentham or his Representatives shall be 
to a place beyond sea or out of the dominions of the state ;
and spirituous liquor, unless where ordered in the 
be sufficient to produce uneasiness in a man if it be against his 
and spiritous liquor , unless where in the way of
Elizabeth Wood ; and also of all those four pieces or 
it should acquiesce in his being punished : If it happens 
6 . P.275 December 1799 .  " At length the commissary was enabled 
not much tendency to raise it . He little dreamt , 
12th . To lay for them the foundation stone of a 
with this Law as without it :  the Robber , if convicted , 
in
are all  <gap/>  on the any same footing .
H170 Those only can defend themselves with valeur , who are
6.th Where the Act prohibited is such as does produce 
and be answerable for any escape of such offender , and also 
his Successors as a means of engaging the said Pri- 
Establishment of them as the Subjects of distinct 
day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hun-
4 . Instead of imprisonment he may be confined to hard
4
44 
be left to triumph in his wickedness  . The punishment here
new expedient that gives an additional chance for the 
any Judge thereof full true and perfect answer make to 
1. Laws relative to Householders in general. 
to be done to his person , or a different one . 
when passed is hasty and incomplete ; his Inferences
to bring Convicts to this Hulk . In the first instance 
the Highway shall be paid one third of what he
 occasion that , in regard to the whole number confined in that same
few drops from it to save this worthy gentleman. 
preventive measures. might be of use. 
-trons and organizers of the most improved of 
circumstantial the catalogue is that can be given of these 
exclusive of the expences of fitting up and stocking 
nominally the same , become in effect so much the less and
and even when the distinction is made no reason can
not
 " been consigned to the governor , to be retailed for the use of the 
10 .
of 
-tion thereto not only on the part of the Court or Officer 
and Pasture  , adjoin to each other,and do contain in 
1000 Convicts as aforesaid , there may be more than one thousand such Con-
in detail the state , not only moral and medical , but 
Peltier ' s Trial p . 164 Edit 1803
sent , from the office now Your Lordship ' s , to the Governor ; at any 
 " never fail of due attention , * that such relief would be 
ordered
"such, and their lives perpetually in danger. As a proof of the little 
Offences against Justice .
Henry Mildmay  _  Mr Neild  _  were it but possible  _  would
from Battersea near York Place , and on the 
maxim invented by the guilty for the benefit of the 
Constitutional Code 
but the quality in other respects is expressly reser- 
offences against property, offences against reputation, and 
Language is , not to furnish Terms for a Man to
Heedlessness consists in the not being conscious of a ma=
in question may seem to be carried to too great a degree 
"and which, from the advanced state of the private farmers, might 
 [  ( C )  Amenable ]  See Tit :   [ Theft ]  sub voce  [ Amenable ] 
untutored by vitious Definitions imply as much : 
observed :  Writers every now & then stretching the 
like it ?  Is it any where about the Treasury ?  - any such
Prisoners according to the plan prescribed by the Statute of 
moment the Unhappiness it prevents to a Person 
implies any such Thing . The ordinary
 from what it is in the other . Taking is beginning
the purpose of purchasing the same And Whereas 
-jesty shall appoint , untill such offender shall be transported 
therefore commonly looked upon as an act of hostility against 
term have the powers incident to the office of Sheriff or Goaler , 
:nions of a particular state which his excursions are 
upon the very merits  _  the acknowledged or at any
 " brought by speculators and traders who occasionally touched there ,
whom he may have injured in like manner to come in and
to be wrong. So that, here again no new light 
-soners without the spur of corporal severities to set 
C 
-culated to lay restraints upon every species of vice and immorality, 
5 . The Woman shall be presumed to be a Virgin , unless he 
 +  If what the worthy Magistrate really looks for is a
:pened that you were much weaker than the assailant; inso= 
erecting and building one or more Penitentiary House or 
"these people, to be revenged, were accustomed to assemble in large 
"they valued the peace and good order of the settlement, and their 
or possibility of evasion . 
instance in which it appears to them , that the de-
or five years  _  for the time that none of the Convicts could 
-ham ' s office :  it required a Member of Parliament , 
 : terial circumstance which really exists , where there are 
in question as a ground of Justification .
-interrupted , the most effectual and indestructible 
Law can do is to forget all that our Author 
establishment to be inspected at a view , from a 
the thing that was to be called a Law there was any thing to be ex- 
it originally attached bestowed on the Act that
interest with duty , the effectuating of which in the 
prove their Marriages :  and all such as appear to have been
was left to persons in office  ( Gentlemen or Noble Lords
 " expected from one , who certainly feels , as much as any 
8th . To convert the prison into a school , and by an 
(A) (B) 
because there were unpaid gentlemen to whom such
takes  _  The Traveller would suffer just as much 
receive every such supernumerary Convict on the same terms per head
be suffered to be built at a tenth a fifteenth 
dispute should arise  , the same shall be settled by two Referees , one 
Howard , who with all the zeal , with all the munifi-
Offences only in a few Cases; )  3 False Pretences ;
I have no other Intimation than from this 
his said Successors shall on the first day of every 
for such considerations as are herein after mentioned, 
the existence of a fact or circumstance on which
Panopticon Convict Proposal 1793
In either case , the Mis-sup osal may have respect
fairer to let that matter be referred , when 
Appetites of Avarice or Revenge . 
in 
-nary Schools , in the common and most use-
"own security, to assist in apprehending and bringing them to 
may contract or agree with any person or persons for the 
The design was _ that Convicts once sent there should 
for a certain time be deemed presumptive evidence of death or 
what words they should make Parliament believe that
C 
2.dly The word  " taking "  we are told implies
occasionally instead of it ' s genuine and intelligible meaning corres- 
said hereby intended number of 1000 prisoners the sum 
Annuity-Societies . 
given: for every man ought to be dear to every man. 
Universally therefore the Inexpediency of the
principle this author in another place :  that on the 
and the Wife may be enabled and obliged to correspond with 
unpleasant or hazardous vicinity enables the whole 
-worth , to and from Battersea , and in other part on 
To make amends for the oppression thus exercised upon 
upon this day of in the thirty fifth year of 
Principle will be found to concur with precedent in recommend 
the Judge Advocate :  most probably from the tenor of the instructions 
23. 
Using
panies, without any of those opportunities of pro 
any rate, that from and after the expiration of it, his return 
 : nitive provision is made for the Woman on whose behalf he
in some trade or occupation whereby they 
on part by the said road leading out of the said 
which so alarmed and terrified them, that they instantly fled, 
companies , without any of those opportunities 
to human nature , which would be outraged & trampled under 
be inflicted on him as would be inflicted on him for 
every week. 
cases the act was adequately intentional with regard to 
towards such Building on the Commencement 
C 
neatness, superior to what is usual among the lower 
-sion ,  where there was nothing to be expressed .
warmth and light whenever the reason renders 
2. To any one who is particularly dear to him. 
THEFT 
or by the expiration of his term shall be entitled to his liber-
place , then it is that the door is shut against all alike  _  
5 . P.202 March 1799 .  " The settlement was at this time much
Note ( ) to p. 
 If your intention was to strike him in the leg in such 
let them be obliged to declare upon oath whether they are married 
I may obtain that pardon , or that amnesty , on which my
her a Wife may make a Will: or rather as 
produced. If married, certificates of the death of the Wife or 
 ( a ) 
same ages in a state of liberty , within the 
(a) 
bestowed it on the discriminating of the Offence from
-tinguished of its rivals , that the Panopticon plan 
ing four Guineas for four Volumes of his Truths, 
the said establishment all which expences together 
entered upon it, before I was awakened from that dream of 
If the place be a vacant spot not within the domi= 
hence it is that
road form London to Wandsworth , to and from 
-ful clauses, covenants and agreements, as shall be re- 
may either be about to go out of that jurisdiction , or not . 
to do you such damage, whereas in truth he had a 
 " and as it was not probable that many of them would , on 
 " same articles could have been sent out for from England , with
H . 166 I hope I may venture to say , that no English assembly need 
degree , it makes no difference . 
it as if a Man were less concerned to know his
afford him such provision for his prisoners as shall
the several different ways in which the party injured 
trades and occupations .
the trades in which they were employed du-
as well as interest , a consciousness which non can feel , but those
have endured such a sacrifice of eternal justice to any miserable interest
 : ing to excess of tenderness :  it would be a hardship to him 
-nitude for the confining maintaining and employing one thousand 
foot , by speaking of guilt in a lukewarm language language ,
# Instit . Tit . De Obl . quae delicto .
-cessary, and thereby preserve them from being obli- 
against Murder :  laying out of Consideration for a
-ceeded upon a small scale , that it is not to 
10
proved delusive: that I should with ease to myself and with 
7 8 
Exposition 
subject him to conviction though it were for a capital 
"enter into an agreement or contract for a certain length of time, 
having agreed to advance the purchase money in that 
14th To make himself personally responsible 
 " person alluded to "  presently after by the worthy Magis-
Will. 
2. To keep them clad in a state of lightness & neat- 
not suffer himself to see any thing unpleasant or 
out of the question, or rather that it was perfectly 
3rd To keep them supplied with separate beds and 
Simple  <gap/>  Corporal Injuries 
-tracted for , accompanied with a comparative statement of
1. 
viz: by removing from that time forwards whatever 
not happened through any default on the part of the said Pro-
If from one third the Fine were to be in-
upon that occasion it was, that it was notified to 
encouraged me in a hope, which however has in some respects 
Consciousness might by infer'd with equal 
indifferent , if not worse than indifferent , the inform-
verily
sentence _ fourteen years _ between fourteen years and seven years _ 
of cleanliness scarce any where conjoined with liberty. 
in 
be 
The following string of provisions are calculated in 
of :  and that , not only on Sundays at the time of 
of distant danger: nor whether by fear of danger to his per= 
5 . For any hardships suffered by the child he may suffer in the way
In ordinary Cases where a man accepts money , it is not that 
he wishes to be :  if not , to any other place at which
 [  ( B )  Liberty ]  A person who has been kidnapped is not to
Picture of the Treasury
 : vous than the counterfeiting of the latter . But this objection , 
shall be made for the woman in question . And if there ap=
 " at home . "  _  
in
8 P.305 . September 1800 .  " Many of the inferior farmers were 
-king purchase thereof in manner therein also mentioned , 
the occupation of the said Elizabeth Wood , on the 
attempted to be exercised by the master , a Hampden
which modifies it into Effect . 
e
A State Tumult is a Misdemeanour. 
carried on upon that element which is common to man= 
have been properly administered. There cannot therefore 
be understood to have regained his Liberty , till he has
 " received of their having brought away any Convicts or other 
of the maintenance of the said Establishment , shall during the 
of the said Thomas Rhodes and Elizabeth Wood , 
"and where he would receive them. He was also at liberty to 
16 
&c. In all these cases the damage, if any, is commonly either unintentio= 
according to the local circumstances of the different countries in 
there , as well as on any other day upon summons 
party injured
& the purpose of the moment is to be seve served; 
be stiled a and Justiciabilis venias . If he is about to go out 
 ( 4
at all upon the Subject . 
not to be weakened  _  it is a punishment no good man 
it 
the expression of another ' s will :  beings that act from such motives 
:minateness of the nature of these offences excludes 
-ably be computed to have save the public to the
as great persons as any he can have been attending to
the Consent of the owner to be wanting . ||
Clauses . of the other .
Indian-corn which they had stolen. 
the subordinate tyrants , whom it fell to the lot of
the said
that of which the dread is the only restraint on the actions of powerful 
70 
-ing them in view . 
materials used in the construction of the said Building and
leave of the Court , on the part of any person what-
which this Epithet was taken is ,  " Fraudulenta
:wise have: and making the damage fall upon the au= 
-fining and employing in hard labour such Convicts as are 
Commons with me  _  for twice though in vain they have abetted 
So well has the system succeeded in this and
opportunity may offer for their being transported. 
more than adequately 
18
labour may be encreased . 
which is not Larceny , but Larceny and something
St George of Russia and Brigadier General in 
-tators against atrocious crimes , the gravest and most dignified moral 
was not called for: it was not given: he was not heard 
-creased to two thirds , the Law instead of being better
one or the hardship of the other  :  at the same time 
(4 
Not to oppose, or suffer to be opposed, any obstruction to the 
mentioned. 
to it in its more perfect form has grounded itself .
tend to subject him to conviction though it were for a 
charge 
residence will frequently be upon land within the domi= 
an offence of the same kind committed to the prejudice 
he has done you no such damage. It regards the mat= 
 " without the positive and immediate interference of the government 
"them outlaws if they refused, and requiring the inhabitants, as 
-of by a Common Field called Brumlands , in 
lands in the occupation of the said Edward Wellers , 
 : pear probable reason to believe that farther time is necessa=
11th . To pay a sum of money for every one who 
tumult which are committed on the same occasion, or not 
it
7
-nal Sense concerning Quantity & Figure .
shelter himself under , while he causes others to go
any part of his native or any other country for any time
3
though it may increase, yet the increase of live 
:out his uniform. 
for the value of the said Buildings and other irremoveable 
she a Widow .
The Definition of the Civil Law , from
:nions of any state, the state of which the offender is a mem= 
7 
Mr Bentham, is intended to accommodate. I have 
been upon the look out for such a place for above these
7 . P.285 . February 1800 _   " Some clothing had been received by these
of minuteness . But nothing less seems necessary in order 
 " to issue some slop cloathing to the convicts , a quantity having
Forgery .
witness when it is in my power to relieve it . But if go I
offender so removed shall continue in the place of confinement , 
:fects of a single Act but from the effects of the Habit. Now 
will probably more than counterbalance the difference. 
time being after fixing upon a certain piece of Ground therein 
suffer ' dand over , it is always worth a Man ' s while
who have felt for the wrongs of their brethren .
to tell :  it would be like making him confess himself a 
of characters: for, whilst the mass of the people continue to be of 
may depend venture to depend on? If after pay- 
"accustomed to follow their manner of living, might have been 
Art.7. Each Prisoner shall be supplied every day 
have run counter to the design) or by the supposed profitable 
 " the west ocean coast of America , and where in the prize
leaving behind them their spears, &c. and about 20 bushels of 
in the twentyfourth year of his present Majesty ' s reign , intituled 
Passage and which that part of the Work which 
 the aforesaid animus furandi as a characteristic
the practice so ha pily received , every kind of strong
and legitimacy of money , where the money itself is suspected ,
Penitentiary Panopticon one year  :  not ex-
search out by a circumstantial description the several pre= 
"and taken to the same savage mode of living, where the sup- 
"possession of these pests, a proclamation was issued, calling on 
Critical
e 
by that peculiarity of construction , which without any 
Thomas Rhodes , containing together by admeasure-
"smallest degree of gratitude for such favours. Even Even Ben-nil-long 
more or less , bounded on the North by lands in the 
"in Norfolk Island, the settlers who had raised refusing to sell it, 
that , so far as punishment is concerned  , it produces its 
:cers at unexpected times (which, to ensure their being unexpected, 
Offences against the external Security of the State. 
produces for the present a Quantity of Unhappiness 
Such I conceive to be the Laws inflicting capi-
<gap/> The notion of a false standard supposes the existence 
-"ply "of food was often precarious, their comforts not to be called 
Properties of Laws which do not exist & 
your Lordships, to be apprized of the number of Con- 
with wholesome food, as much as he shall choose: 
as to the so well paid gentlemen it would have been
Offences against the external Security of the State. 
turn of the lower classes of the people. 
It invites men to commit crimes . If a man steals he may be 
following proposal for maintaining & employ- 
Bentham which formed the basis of the present agreement , 
 " to the settlement , was to be pursued in all the ships which 
was inad quately intentional: if your intention was to 
to the Goal from which he shall have been removed ; And 
 [  ( A )  Lawful cause ]  See Tit :   [ Justifications ] 
"now be done with far less trouble and expence than formerly, the 
individual Circumstances directly as thro' 
Man ' s self made by the infinite Variety of Objects
C
-fied "  to those who are to obey it . "  Those therefore who are to Obey must 
out of 500 , living at the commencement of the year 1801 , deaths 120 ,
have departed .
by that peculiarity of construction , which without any 
being in the way to receive afterwards a Summons to come ; 
 " It was understood "  :  viz :  by the author , Captain Collins , 
an enormous rate of expence , that for that 
 " relinquishment "  . Would to God his Grace ' s more success-
not Larceny , both having the same Meaning .  _  It is 
under 
yet themselves reducible to some one or other of 
would otherwise be confined on board the Hulks , 
was the determination to cover the country with 
come to be added altogether. The more ample then and 
As to foreigners, upon their coming into the country 
from Analogy of the Similarity in Kind and Degree
of equal efficacy for effecting that intimacy of union between 
less , bounded on the West in part by lands in the 
=ish whether it be a case of theft or of Embezzlement 
must  _  and there be no reprieve for me  _  grant me this boon
2 . He may be banished from , or confined to , the whole or
that the best thing which a Student of the 
shall have been made to the Estate of such Survivor as well 
been conveyed back to the place from whence he was co : 
Contrectatio Lucri faciendi Gratia , vel ipsius
employment , by variety of contrivance , and above all , 
Upon 
-cence , and more than all the gentleness of his il-
:thors. 
the providing buildings and other accommodations for the reception of 
absolutely inexpedient  _  there ought to be no Law 
As the Impression of these made by in a
person committed to his Care , above the 
Larceny , or that the Thing is under any intrinsic Incapacity
In a Word the Import of the Term Theft with
 " nearly ruined by the high price they were obliged to give for such 
occasions of punishing the offence less frequent the following 
3 .
Import of the Word Larceny to a Synonimity with 
gardens 
All the while care is taken not to ask the debtor a= 
the midst of them , and incessantly keep-
into any kind of vice, and, from the pain which it gives 
to have the one prison , that had so long ago and 
-ting in detail the state , not only moral & medical , 
reward and punishment , without the expence of the 
therefore very properly cut off these redundant
-ings improvements and stock to be settled by two referees, one 
to choose an Umpire in case of a Variance 
18. 
him , it may also be expected to take an active part in pu= 
such a manner as to give him dangerous bruise or kill 
from without excepted :  and this without em-
of his body; or any part of his body be marked with 
have been done you by your adversary, whereas in fact 
39
income in driblets day by day during the course of the same 
purpose of providing an Habitation and 
45
found 
-panied by proper vouchers for the proof as well as well of
at least  _  let my accomplices in whose company I have a right 
Art.4 . And Whereas it may chance that at or after the time when the 
commodious and insulated room in the center , the 
of Retaliation .  ( A ) 
so injured by him shall have an equal claim , in proportion
power that the state of which the party injured is a 
C 
Your Lordship and his Grace knows how.-
the Rectangle formed of the Abseiss and the Para-
If your intention was only to hurt him in the fore- 
persons may be kept within the reach of being 
-ted to favour the deceit :  The word Rule as we have seen by the loose- 
the said Henry Brown , and on the West by lands 
in a voluminous Treatise on a very extensive & 
The nature of things does not afford another expedient 
perform the act intrinsically obnoxious. Of these acts 
I had insisted on an increase of terms , spite of all I
thought of a cheaper means of repelling the attack but whether 
1.st To furnish the prisoners with a constant supply 
Stipulated number of 1000 , for the express 
understood that nothing should be refunded, is, that 
on the East by the said road leading to and from Battersea , 
may afterwards earn their livelihood . Extraor-
that the Ground should be purchased, not on Mr 
pass , that now persons discoursing of a proposed Act
him for the accomplishing that identification of 
-ation was addressed . I speak of Mr Neild , a second
Art. 11. The incidental occasional on 
6th To maintain them in a state of inviolable 
which , had it existed , would have been material to
be in the possession of a private person for want of 
 : gry with him for making use of the only miserable remedy
Misery of the Crime remaining undiminished , 
forming of those who have occasion to be informed whether 
Note
"of those who devoted a part of their time to this useful purpose, 
much  _  
County 
on their own account. 
the lives of the Prisoners .
is deprived of the use of it in part. 
allowing them a share in the produce . 
in as far as the same shall have been prescribed 
demonstration , that the only eligible mode of 
that according to the first estimates made by Messrs :  
-quate to each man's desires. 
limitations and restrictions as are contained in an Act made 
also agreed that the said first intended Governor and 
privit of Government and at the recommendation of 
